Here we come back in the court, and there is, I think, the last part. And there we are working with the, no, it's not actually the real last part. Here we work just in two courts, just for situation of the cover. So the idea is to do one defense, situation of the cover. So we really search the cover, one second cover, and we finish with the set. So the objective, generally, is to do two, three cover situations and to stop. To don't go too much in overcharge physically, because this exercise, if you keep for a long, long time, it's really hard physically. So there is attack from two, two, three situations of cover, to put the ball near to the net. After attack from four, if there is one mistake here, for example, I put the ball of cover inside. And there is all the... all the time, team that move with our system for situation of the cover, you see. After that, we repeat in two sides. So here you can go free, you know, you can play one side, play in the other side also. We go out, and we start to play with the exclamative ball, and there we play normal. Okay. There is no good set. And there, there is just middle blocker that they can move and jump, lateral don't jump on the block. And there we play a little bit more six against six. But this again, it also depends about the week. Normally we jump couple day, Monday, Tuesday, and Wednesday, I have just practice in the morning and we don't jump. So we are obligated a little bit to do six and six situation in the first practice of the morning. Here we are playing one situation of free ball, but it's just for the middle block. So in couple... in the... in the... both side, we put one easy ball, and it's just obligation for the middle blocker. And there we continue to play. This is more situation of six and six. Like you see in the last part, if the player searches the block out, for me it's good, they can search the block out. In the first part, I ask continuity and cover, and after there is, there is objective to score the point. Okay. There is again exclamative back, and then we come back, we change middle blocker. Change line, you see, of the outside hitter, in both side, and we come back to work, like before, with the situation of defense set cover, so two-three cover, lateral, with all transition of the lateral player and the middle blocker. Here was pipe available, so position six go short. Here there is a ball, position six go long. Like I say, you know, attack from two. Position two, six, go all the time short, this system. Here I change side, the other side, they continue to do the same job. So again, before cover, again try to resolve good, again cover with the blocker, and then we finish, we finish and we stop like that. And then we play. And after these, the two situation, we come back to play. So exclamative ball. And here we go, we go like that, and we repeat until when we go on to spiker, when we put the situation of setter in first line. So after we change and we put cover situation of pass, of glide, back of the middle blocker, we go inside the situation of gamma, pipe, this depends how, what we go to play with the opposite, and we continue like that, and we change after we change setter also to, to let the ball go. To let them play in the first part of the week, I, I really never change, never work with the, with the starting six or situation like that. Everybody do work with the whole setter. I like to really a lot of time. I like also that position four go to go attack from position two. For example, we did this situation in the last two practice that we, everybody turn. So I would say Dieter go to attack from position two. And then. Everything. And the arena, three ball for the middle block. 