===== SESSION: https://volleybrains.com/roberto-santilli/ =====

----- VIDEOS -----


----- TEXTO -----
10. Roberto Santilli:'Inspire the individual and allow them to be the best that they can be.'

Today we feature Roberto Santilli. Roberto just won the 2020-2021 South-Korean KOVO V-League with the team of Incheon Korean Air Jumbos. Congrats!

But Roberto's experiences go much further than this recent victory. He has coached for over 2 decades in Italy, Poland, Russia and was coach of the Australian National mens program. He for sure has a very rich coaching experience. Enjoy his answers to our questions.

Roberto, why and how many years ago did you decide to commit to being a professional volleyball coach? What pushed you towards that decision?

It was 1978. I was 13 years old and in my hometown, Rome, I went to see the world volleyball championship final, Italy v Russia.

There were 15,000 spectators in the stadium and I couldn’t conceive all the types of emotions I felt.

This experience really had a deep impact on me and I fell in love with the sport. I’ve spent the rest of my life chasing my love all around the world.

Choices in life are made because of the models we find in our life and I had a real role model in my father, even though he didn’t coach, he always enjoyed gathering the children of our family and instructed them how to play sports, get better at kicking a soccer ball, ...

He really instilled that coaching passion in me.

What advice would you give yourself as a starting coach? An advice that is so clear and logical for you now, but that you had to develop over the years.

When I was young I was thinking to organise the people around me, my way,  but overtime I have realised the job of the coach is to understand the individuals that make up the team and inspire and allow them to be the best that they can be.

Do you have a particular goal as a coach? Maybe a goal that you already reached or a goal that is so hard to reach that it gives you daily motivation?(and some healthy stress :-))

The goal is usually aligned to the club, the place where you coach, but my personal goal is to always enjoy doing my job.

It’s important to me to have a happy life.

The future of volleyball, how will the game evolve according to your opinion?

In the last few years the game has become very physical and I think we lost a part of the technical skill that really make a difference at the highest level.

If we want volleyball to be a more commercial product for TV and to get big crowds in our venues. Well, we will need longer rallies for that.

So we have to find a way to get there...

According to you, what rule change is necessary in the future? And why would you want to see this new rule implemented?

Every rule that increases the duration of the rally should be implemented e.g. add one defender outside of the court, ...

So, you are Dr. Frankenstein and have the ability to put together the world's most performing volleyball player. Which characteristics would he/she have.

The right arm of Steve Timmons

The hands of Goran Vujevic

The legs of Leo Marshall

The brain of Karch Kiraly

The empathy of Bruninho.

When preparing a game, how does your general approach look like.

The starting point is to know yourself, your own strengths and weaknesses - without this everything else is worthless.

2. Understand the deep secret of the opponent - where is their safety.

3. Transfer understandable and simple information to your players.

What is an unusual habit or an absurd thing that you love?

I smoke a cigarette after every game.

(Matias here: you probably have figured out that it’s my goal to share a lot of content and it’s for you, the reader, to figure out what you want to try, to copy, iterate on...well, don’t try this one.;-))

How has a failure, or apparent failure, set you up for later success? Do you have a ‘favorite failure’ of yours?

When I came back to one of my old clubs, where I was very successful in the past, I didn’t find the same connection as before.

After 6 months of working there I got fired. And I thought it was such a big failure, I came back with all my experience to my hometown and I failed...

But it really gave me an important lesson about how time changes things and that your own expectations can be closely related to a romanticised vision of the past.

I became far more realistic from having this experience.

What is one of the best or most worthwhile investments you’ve ever made?

The best investment for a coach is to study all the topics related to the job of coaching including; psychology, statistics, motor learning, teaching methodology, biology and physiology.

Of course the study of the game, its components and the relationships between the skills plus of course spending time studying game tapes.

Personally I’ve always appreciated studying these subjects but over the years I started to focus more on my own emotional development.

This has improved my empathy for the people that I work with and made me reach an emotional maturity needed to coach better.

My time invested in yoga and mediation has really changed the way that I am present with other people and hopefully this allows others to become the best version of themselves.

What advice would you give to a smart, driven young coach about to enter the  “professional coaching world”?

Enjoy every moment you spend with your players and let them enjoy the practice.

Maybe even more important, what advice should they ignore?

Ignore the advice about how to negotiate a contract. Remember that the contracts never make you happy.

In the last five years, what new belief, behaviour, or habit has most improved your life?

Meditation

When you feel overwhelmed or unfocused, or have lost your focus temporarily, what do you do?

Swear first and then breathe deeply to return to myself.

Thanks Roberto.

Hi readers, if you're reading this that means that you're a subscriber to VolleyBrains. Thank you for that.

I've started to 'gate' the content on the website, BUT readers only need to fill in their email address to get full access to every article.

Anyways, enjoy the finals of all the competitions that are going on at the moment and have a great week.👍

Matias

P.S.: Go here to contact me.



