===== SESSION: https://volleybrains.com/giovanni-guidetti/ =====

----- VIDEOS -----
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9YQxkHYZLLA
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nsQoSq9qKyc
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Bsjbb7vqShg

----- TEXTO -----
11. Giovanni Guidetti: 'Listening is more important than talking'

Hi kind readers, in today's article we feature Giovanni Guidetti.

Giovanni is for his 12th year the head coach of Turkish powerhouse Vakifbank. We had a nice videotalk last March which laid the ground for this article.

I won't go over Giovanni's CV, it is long and full of emotions AND the highest level of volleyball that is played on this globe. (You can wiki it yourself;-))

In our call we covered many interesting topics about how he sees the position of the coach in a club team, what leadership really means, where his love for volleyball comes from, the real difference between current male and female volleyball...and much much more.

There is a lot information in here. I mashed 2 video's together, there are some written word answers also.

Take your time, listen to everything when you can and if you want...there is a lot of usable advice in here for any coach!

And as always you can give feedback over here. 👍

The first clip is about rule change proposals and male vs female volleyball.

Down below we have a 23 minute long video where we talk about his own growth as a coach, the biggest leadership key, how to manage a team, ...etc

Plus a written Q&A about Giovanni's volleyball roots.

Yes, from here on the article is 'locked' to new visitors, but simply putting in your email address will unlock everything and will get every new article to your mailbox.

Giovanni, why and how many years ago did you decide to commit to being a professional volleyball coach?

That was many, many years ago. So right now I am 48yo. I decided to become a coach when I was almost 18-19 years old, if I remember correctly.

Like many kids of my age, my 'first' dream was to become a pro player. In my room, I had the posters of Karch Kiraly and Pat Powers. I didn't have the posters of any soccer player, just music and volleyball that were the only 2 things in my life.

But my body for sure didn't lend me a hand to become a great player. And there was no libero position in that time, remember that.

That probably would've given me an opportunity to play. I was a very talented receiver and defensive player, a very technical player, but of course, my body was 'terrible', or let's say, not adapted to have a big career.

I started to coach 'minivolley' in my teens and year after year I moved up and when I was 23 years old, I became an assistant coach for a second league team in Italy.

They had a problem with the head coach at the beginning of the season and they asked me to take over the team.

Of course, I asked my father his advice. My father is a renowned volleyball coach in Italy (Adriano 'il prof' Guidetti played in the A1 team of Modena in the 50's and after that had a rich coaching career in Italy's A1 league).

I asked him what to do, and he said, 'why not?'

So at that moment my career really started and his advice was the best advice that I could ever receive, 'listening' is still the best advice to any coach at any level.

Knowing that you have this big volleyball family, how did this influence you...what did the young Giovanni take away from all that love for the game?

We were for sure not a normal family. My father was a volleyball coach, a professor of physical education at school and a tennis teacher. There were no 'full pro' coaches in the Italian A1 like there are now.

And so when I was a kid, my father was coaching the team of Padova with a young Bernardi, Paolo Tofoli and Ljubo Travica in that team and for every training he drove from Modena to Padova and back by car.

Every morning though he was in school teaching, so after every evening practice he came back home very late and in the morning he had to go back to school. Really a different time.

I'm the youngest in my family and I have 2 older sisters, they reached a decent level as players, the 3th Italian League and after every game they finished I just took the ball, spiked over the net, spiked against he wall, I really loved it.

Plus every Sunday, we had a family reunion. The families of my uncle, my aunt and my father all came together at my grandfather and grandmother's house in the countryside.

Over there it was only, only volleyball. My uncle Gian Paolo was coaching Modena Volley (coaching Quiroga, Anastasi, and other players that were the best in the world at that time) I remember very well that my father coached the team of Sassuolo and they had a nice rivalry going on with Modena...all that animosity going on inside your family is a great experience for a young boy.

And in our free time on the street we also played 2 against 2, 3 against 3 or after the Church on Sunday. Well what can I say...

It was really difficult to avoid volleyball, that's what I'm hearing...:-)

I was really, really lucky and nobody has ever 'pushed' me to pick up volleyball, that is the best part.:-)

I liked soccer. I was swimming, I was skiing also, I was playing tennis and at one instance I also stopped playing volleyball.

When I was 15 yo, I was the best player of the youth team of Modena Volley. They really did build the team around me, the year after that I was on the bench, they recruited bigger players (it was the breeding ground for the Panini Modena A1 team) and I was like...if it's like this, I'm done.

I put my focus on tennis.

So I came back and I played at a lower division. And as I mentioned before, my love for coaching was growing and I started that career right there.

Ok, this brings me to a question that can be relevant. Of course everyone develops his own coaching identity, but there is a popular distinction to be made between 'player coaches' like Andrea Gianni and Bernardi who you mentioned, that once were elite world class players and 'coach coaches'. How do you see that?

Yes a very good question, I can only give my own insight on that of course.

I know that when I was playing that I could help my teammates in reception, but for sure in the other parts of the game I had to get to a pretty good level not to be 'bad'. So you can call me a 'coach coach' in a way. :-)

When I see Bernardi and the progress he is making as a coach I think that that is something special, because I really think that it's much more difficult for him than for me.

For Bernardi 'what is attack'? Well, I open my eyes, I jump and I score...that is what attacking is for him.

For sure Lorenzo was and is also a hard worker, but as a coach he really has to embody a player with less god given (and developed) ability than he had himself and completely adapt his training and coaching to that.

But having said that...it works in both ways. For me I feel that when I coach great players, the world's best, there is this insight that they have that you can't control, you can just enjoy it.

I ask them a specific question after they did an action and they tell me 'don't worry, Giovanni, I see everything'

When I was attacking I 'saw' nothing. :-)

For example when I was coaching Zhu Ting that was exactly how it was. She sees the game differently.

Listening is more important than talking, we are there to give feedback of course, but most of the time it's just our second priority.

So to conclude, a 'coach coach' or a 'player coach', we all have to adapt.

That was the entire article, dear readers.

Thanks a lot Giovanni for your time and insights, it was my pleasure.

I want to end on this, a blunt ASK. If you enjoyed this article, copy and paste this url volleybrains.com/giovanni-guidetti/ and share it on Facebook...spread the VOLLEYBRAINS word!

Thanks and enjoy your day,

Matias



