===== SESSION: https://volleybrains.com/emanuele-zanini/ =====

----- VIDEOS -----
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wfKPwnVpV7Y
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=72fMerk9PaU
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YQTyLL5ZVj0
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nour_MVw-3M
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1HEywPgjwJo
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CebCxmGXKc8

----- TEXTO -----
12. Emanuele Zanini:'Every day is an opportunity to write on a new blank page'

In this article we feature Italian coach Emanuele Zanini.

Emanuele's career as a head coach in the Italian Serie A1 started in the year of 2000, coming fresh of an Olympic Bronze medal at the Olympic games of Sydney as the assistant coach of the Italian national men's team.

Over the last 20 years he coached on various Italian teams and all over Europe.

Congratulations are in place btw, because he just got qualified for the European Championships of 2021 in his current job as head coach of the Croatian national men's team.

Thanks Emanuele for wanting to do the interview in English so we are able to share more video content(as requested by many readers)

There are over 2000 words on this page and 5 video clips for a total of 37 minutes. I tried to keep the clips 'bite-sized' but to go over everything that's here, you'll need more than one go.

Enjoy.

Why and when did you decide to become a pro coach?

In this first clip below Emanuele talks about how he started out as a physical trainer to later develop into a head coach. All this by an accidental meet-up with Andrea Anastasi.

He goes over their early successes together. First World League Gold in Argentina in 1999, European Championships Gold in 1999 and Olympic Bronze in 2000.

What advice would you give yourself as a starting coach? An advice that is so clear and logic for you now, but that you had to develop over the years.

While answering Emanuele goes into a specific example where he would totally have messed it up at 30 years old(he's 56 years old now).

He explains how his current approach changed completely compared to his early days.

For privacy reasons a small part of the clip was muted, you'll get why when you get there.

Do you have a particular goal as a coach? Maybe a goal that you already reached or a goal that is so hard to reach that it gives you daily motivation?

I have some dreams that are still 'in the private box', but being a former athlete yourself you can imagine what they are about. (the Olympic games...)

My second goal is to stay on track to improve myself as a coach. And I'm rather blunt with that. What I mean is this...

The day that I feel that I stop enjoying being a coach, stop to have an open mind about learning and educating myself. Well, I'll just step away from it. And I will do something else.

But until that day comes, you'll see me next to a court somewhere.:-)

You know, before I had a lot of dreams and was chasing them. Now, if these 'dreams' arrive; I'll be satisfied. If they won't, I'll be satisfied as well.

The future of volleyball, how will the game evolve in your opinion?

We've seen so many changes over the years, I really believe that evolution is good and necessary. People today don't remember that we used to be able to serve the ball from a small 3 meter area behind the baseline, soon people will forget that we used to play without a libero. :-)

Balls are changing in weight, it can be that the net will get raised.

You can see this at the highest women's level already, they took the best parts of the men's game and implemented it.

Not last year due to Covid, but the year before during our summer camp I stopped by the women's training camp and even switched sometimes with the coach, (Daniele Santarelli from Champions League winner Conegliano coaches the Croatian women's side) so I believe I have a good enough understanding about the women's game.

It's not just a player like Egonu who can ruthlessly kill the ball. A lot of top level women's games are looking like 'receive, set, kill...next serve'. Their side-out runs smoothly.

According to you, what rule change is necessary in the future? And why would you want to see this new rule implemented?

In the video clip Emanuele talks about a gradual increase in net height in youth volleyball to be able to teach basic skills in a correct manner and to keep the enjoyment up while training and playing. (everybody wants to be able to spike :-))

Furthermore he would like to see the libero be able to spike. Not limiting him to the current role only, but also adding this one extra spiking possibility, NOT to increase the spectacle but just because at the core of sports it's just wrong to not have a player show his full potential.

If a player is able and capable to spike, let him spike. (Emanuele makes a good example out of Grebennikov, but there are many more)

At the end of the video Emanuele's talks about his 'discovery' of Stefan Hubner (now the coach of Lüneburg in the German Bundesliga) who was for that time also an 'undersized' middle and who become a multiple year best blocker in the Italian Serie A1.

Why not ask a silly question also, we had so many serious ones. :-) So, you are Dr. Frankenstein and have the ability to put together the world's most performing volleyball player. How would you go about it?

(Matias: hold on tight for imo the best answer I heard til now)

Honestly, Matias, it's not a 'dream', it's a nightmare. I don't want to 'build' this kind of player. Probably I could give you 10 players with 10 great characteristics but I won't do that.

In my opinion 'life' creates these kind of champions. Take into account their own genetics, their first coach who got them fired up about the game, the coaches they had year after year, their environment, their luck for playing without big injuries, being lucky by being in a team that really showcases their own skill, their partner in life, ...

Even when you have all the ingredients you won't be able to recreate this exact and perfect player.

For me, I consider myself lucky when I have these players in my team OR when they are at the other side of the net as an opponent and we have the honour to play against them.

(Matias: we went on to 'name drop' some of the players we consider 'elite players' where we played and trained with...but ended up with Sergey Tetyukhin as a great example of one of the biggest allrounders that ever played the game, zero ego...just a man that enjoys the game, has fun and probably that's why he played well into his 40's. Will need to polish off the Russian and get him on a videocall :-))

Like it should be for every coach that is fortunate enough to be a pro.

Best game you've ever seen. Very simple, what recent or game from the volleyball vaults did validate once more that volleyball is the greatest sport on the globe.

Italia - Cuba when Italy won the first World Championship, that was in 1990. This was the most impressive game from that era in my opinion. It was Joel Despaigne against Italy.:-)

For sure it was a different kind of volleyball than what we play nowadays.

Final point on the clip below...'Bernardiiiiiiiiiiii!'

Another epic game was the final of the Olympics in Bejing in 2008, when the USA won the gold against Brazil.

Millar, Lloy Ball and a player like Riley Salmon who was not considered a 'superstar' player but really showed the importance of mastering a position and owned his task on that squad.

I worked together with Ryan Millar for 2 seasons, he's another example of a great man and a great player.

In 1999, so more or less 10 years before their Olympic gold medal, we where in the States with the Italian national team.

They played with a young Lloy Ball. I vividly remember I went to him after the game and told him that he'll have a great career, it's just a small anecdote, but I'm happy I was right. :-)

What is an unusual habit or an absurd thing that you love?

I like to be in nature, ride my mountainbike or go for a run. Not to do a hard physical workout, but to be 'in touch' with nature. It really helps me, be me.

I also play tennis and the oddest thing is probably that I try every new or different dish that I can, or drink good wine...or to drink a good glass of beer with my friends.

But enjoying red wine for example, I can really get poetic about that. :-) The same goes for being in nature like I said before, it really grounds me. With friends or family or also just by myself.

When I travel for work and I have to stay in an hotel for example, I really try to be outside of a city center. To be close to the countryside, mountains or the sea.

How has a failure, or apparent failure, set you up for later success?

In this clip Emanuele shares his opinion on the occurrence of failure and he touches on his team goals.

You said you are reading a lot. What book do you like the most or books you like the most and what did you take away from them?

I don't 'have' one book like a dogma. What I do however is to take at least one phrase or one concept from the books that I read and try to put that in practice.

I'm however very bad at spitting out all the titles from interesting books from the top of my head. That is my faith.:-)

The most funny thing about reading is that some books don't speak to you in a certain phase of your life and that same exact book rings very true a few years or decades later.

One of the books that I like a lot is 'I promessi sposi' by Manzoni which is an Italian classic. Italian literature has some typical expressions and this book has one of the best in it.

'Il coraggio, uno, se non ce l'ha, mica se lo può dare' - 'The one who isn't courageous isn't able to pass courage on' (literal translation, work a little with me here)

Other books that Emanuele send me to share:

'The score takes care of itself' by Bill Walsh

'Basket & Zen' by Phil Jackson

'Intervista con la storia' by Oriana Fallaci

'L'unica cosa che conta' by Raffaele Morelli

'Io ci sono' by Roberto Cere

'Le chiavi del successo' by Shiv Khera

'It's not how good you are, it's how good you want to be' by Paul Arden

'Istruzioni per vincere' by Livio Sgardi

If you can make the strongest 'starting six' in the world. What would your team look like?

I want to make the best team from the past and the present.

The past:

Setter: Lloy Ball - Opposite: Andrea Zorzi

Middle Blockers: Ryan Millar and Gustavo

Libero: Mirko Corsano

Spikers: Well I'm biased towards my Italian players, but they were the world's top level players, so I guess there is nothing wrong with that. :-)

Samuele Papi and Lorenzo Bernardi

Maybe I skewed a bit too much towards our Italians, but I would want to see this team compete. That's for sure.

The present.

Setter: Toniutti - Opposite: Mikhailov

Libero: Grebennikov

Spikers: Leon and Juantorena

Middle blockers: there are a lot of them...with a lot of different characteristics. I will go for Solé, Nowakowski and Kochanowski

I told you before, I am not just talking about technical skill when I compose a team, but I consider the individual mental characteristics as well.

To be honest, in the present day there are a lot of very good setters, the same goes for opposites, all with a slightly different skill level, but all capable to deliver.

When you feel overwhelmed or unfocused, or have lost your focus temporarily, what do you do? (If helpful: What questions do you ask yourself?)

Music and walking. That's all I need.

Extra:

Emanuele had an extra question for the coaches that are reading this.

You can pick only 3 tools to train a team for an entire season. What tools do you pick?

Thank you Emanuele. My pleasure.



