===== SESSION: https://volleybrains.com/marco-mencarelli/ =====

----- VIDEOS -----


----- TEXTO -----
14. Marco Mencarelli:'Never stop improving yourself, your team and your work environment.'

In today's article we feature Marco Mencarelli.

Marco has an extensive experience coaching and developing the training programs of the Italian Female Youth teams, he has international experience with the Italian Seniors national team and until recently he was coaching in the Italian Serie A.

From this spring Marco became the Technical Director of the Italian female National youth teams and development teams (he also covered this role from 2007-2013), which covers all the work needed to convert talented Italian players into athletes that are ready to compete on the international stage.

In the article you'll understand how both experiences (seniors and talented youth) gave him particular insights on how to think about coaching and developing players in general.

With most of the coaches we do videocalls, others prefer to write down their own responses. Marco gave very well written responses to me in Italian, I hope to have translated all of them correctly, it was a challenge :-). If you are an Italian speaker, you can contact me here if you would want to read the Italian written responses he gave.

Ok, let's go!

Marco, why and how many years ago did you decide to commit to being a professional volleyball coach? What pushed you towards that decision?

I started coaching after studying at the Higher Institute of Physical Education. At the beginning I was mostly involved in Athletics. After a couple of years I switched to volleyball. I had been playing volleyball in my youth(low level).

I had the idea of ​​becoming a professional in 1992 when I was called to join the staff of the Italian Junior Men's National Team together with Angelo Lorenzetti, I remained a part of his staff until 1999.

This experience and opportunity convinced me to invest even more in my professional future as a coach. And truth be told that at that moment in Italy it was a very stimulating endeavour to become a volleyball coach.

What advice would you give yourself as a starting coach? An advice that is so clear and logic for you now, but that you had to develop over the years.

The advice I would give myself when reviewing my career can be summed up in "grasping the essence of people before skills": I consider this important both in the choice of players and in the members of my staff.

However, at the beginning of my career I believed that skills were the main determinants: they are certainly important but they can be developed at any time.

The personality, the character and the ability to stay balanced make the difference in succeeding in any competition and in developing your own skills.

Do you have a particular goal as a coach? Maybe a goal that you already reached or a goal that is so hard to reach that it gives you daily motivation?

A goal that has always accompanied my projects as a coach is to develop the context where I go to work so that the environment I leave is, in some respects, better than the environment I found when I arrived.

This objective can concern every detail of my work: it can concern the team, the individual players, the organization of the club that needed to be more focused on the team's goals, etc.

The future of volleyball, how will the game evolve according to your opinion? Or what are you hoping for that the game will look like in a couple of decades?

The game of volleyball, at this moment, is completing an evolution in a very evident direction: an increase in the speed of the actions and an increase in the speed of the rhythm with which the various situations follow one another.

I don't think there will be a further increase in the speed of the actual plays in the future: I believe it will be more and more important to excel from a technical standpoint both timing wise and to be able to select or use the correct techniques; that combined with the use of many different kind of touches/hits, for sure as a spiker, will be essential to develop into a high performing player.

I am also convinced that the athletic abilities of volleyball players will keep on evolving. Players will be able to jump even higher.

Finally, I believe that the individual defensive skills and using them in the best way possible and the overall connection between the organization of the block and defense represent the factor with the highest potential for development in women's volleyball.

According to you, what rule change is necessary in the future? And why would you want to see this new rule implemented?

I can't imagine a rule capable of substantially changing the volleyball of the future.

I believe there may be small changes like more widely used video assistance for referees. It could also be very interesting to reduce the number of points per set (in Italy sets to 21 points were tested) It could be interesting to test sets to 18 and maybe play a best of 7 set series, who first wins 4 sets wins.

I've heard a lot about using a higher net in men's volleyball but I don't think that will greatly influence the game; a proposal I have heard of suggests the elimination of team rotation, which would shift the game to a hyper specialization, but I can't imagine a game like that, just for the highly increased risk of physically overloading players (for the ones that would stay fixed on the net), and these ‘hypothetical’ changes would mess up the entire score dynamics of our game.

Why not ask a silly question also, we had so many serious ones. :-) So, you are Dr. Frankenstein and have the ability to put together the world's most performing volleyball player. Which at least 5 characteristics would he/she have.

The power of the hit expressed at the maximum of the individual jumping height

2. The motor reaction capacity of the lower limbs perfectly lateralized and precise

3. Perfect control of the body’s imbalance while jumping

4. The correct sensory follow up to the game situation that is playing out

5. The mental ability to always persevere and keep a positive attitude

Best game you've ever seen. Very simple, what recent or game from the volleyball vaults did validate once more that volleyball is the greatest sport on the globe (for all of us).

This question is too difficult to answer because I have seen a really high number of beautiful games in the past 40 years. I have always been very passionate about the sport of volleyball. The spectacle that this sport offers the audience, it’s practitioners and for all who love tactical strategy, the challenge of sports and the distinct movements in our game.

When preparing a new game (next weekend), how does your general approach look like and did you ever change your approach?

First of all, I don't like to change my approach to the game or change the routines that each player has the day before the game or during game day.

I also don't like to play with the mental pressure that precedes the most important match compared to other less important matches because I believe that this strategy can change the mental activation level of some players, especially the less experienced.

Finally, from a technical point of view, I have known players who needed safety through having 'x' amount of ball touches, players who needed to be in excellent physical condition, players who needed to review video of the opponent, or try game situations similar to those characteristics of the opponent just to recognize the situations that will occur in the match: this means that the best thing to do is to understand your players and to try to accommodate their needs.

What is an unusual habit or an absurd thing that you love?

Talking to other coaches, I realized that I have a habit of analyzing a played game in a different way: I almost never care about analyzing the reasons for a defeat or understanding what went wrong.

I prefer to analyze and understand what worked well even in a defeat (in every defeat there are positive details) and, before playing the next game, focus the training on one or two details that can give positive results in a short time.

I always give more attention to what my team is doing than to what the opponent is doing (this allows me to evolve our 'playing potential' even faster); I am always very attentive to what I can change and not to what does not depend on my choices and my actions (this detail allows me the best reading of the game and the most effective adaptations to variable situations).

I always pay a lot of attention to the development of my and my players' skills with respect to managing the match, by masking our own weaknesses and exploiting the weaknesses of the opponents (this detail allows me to repeat successful experiences over time).

How has a failure, or apparent failure, set you up for later success? Do you have a “favorite failure” of yours?

I am a coach who, at the beginning of his career, had learned a lot from his mistakes, especially because I love to build very specific practices, use my own way to manage matches, I use different group management strategies instead of reproducing protocols used by colleagues in other teams.

I love to design game development processes that I experiment with in various capacities; I love being present during the battle(game) and experiencing the battle together with the team.

All this exposes you to make mistakes: in fact, some of these experiences have led me to success and others have led me to failure. I continually ask myself where I’ve made mistakes but always distinguishing "good mistakes" (mistakes that are part of courageous choices, difficult paths to take, great responsibility in taking risks) from "bad mistakes" (mistakes related to insecurity, superficiality, strategic choices that would not have helped the team in the right way and choices for which I have not acquired the right level of knowledge).

Knowing what I did wrong teaches me not to repeat a mistake, but in my work I have also learned to ask myself why a strategy worked and allowed me to win. Like this I became able to approach subsequent experiences where I only had to adapt to the new environment without changing the fundamental principles.

This allowed me to have series of important successes with different teams.

If you can make the strongest 'starting six' in the world, right now. What would your team look like?

I believe that the best team in the world is not made up of the best performers of the various roles that exist, but out of the best cooperation within the group.

I believe that Conegliano is the best team together with Vakifbank not only for the results that they have achieved, but also for how every player who is placed in their environment becomes a winner and contributes to the result better than in any other environment.

I don't know if, by including a great champion from another team (not Conegliano or Vakifbank) into their starting six, if the final result would be better than what we have seen in the last competitive seasons of these two clubs?

Do you have a book that you like a lot? Which lessons did you get out of it?

I really enjoy reading books and I read about very different topics: coaching, thrillers, archeology, essays on philosophy. I underline the most important concepts I read and the concepts that are most useful for my work.

I think the message that most influenced me is the subject of an interview with a great Italian basketball coach: Ettore Messina.

Messina explains how a coach must accustom his players to be demanding with themselves as a prerequisite for their future (victorious) experiences.

What is one of the best or most worthwhile investments you’ve ever made?

The best investment I have ever made was the period in which I had the opportunity to be part of Angelo Lorenzetti's staff in the Men's National Youth Teams: which lasted 5 years.

I was a technical assistant coach but I was also able to test my skills as a physical trainer; I was able to study a lot to improve my knowledge both as a physical trainer and as a coach; and I had my first experiences guiding teams in lower competitions.

At the end of this period and thanks to this investment, I had the opportunity to become part of the staff of the Senior Women's National Team together with Marco Bonitta and to win, in the role of Assistant Coach and Physical Trainer, the 2002 Women's World Championship in Berlin.

What advice would you give to a smart, driven young coach about to enter the “professional coaching world”?

Every successful coach starts from pre-existing methodological models and develops, modifies, evolves the principles according to what their environment suggests them to do: in this manner all the best coaches I know have been trained.

The aspect that makes the difference, however, is the ability to be critical of what we see our models doing, be critical of what we understand listening to our tutors or our mentors, critical of the choices that accompany the winning teams on their journey.

A follow up to the last question. Maybe even more important, what advice should they ignore? What are bad recommendations you hear about coaching or training volleyball?

Today we are constantly subjected to the idea that the mental and behavioural aspects of performance are fundamental and that they are so in a generalised manner, sometimes even replacing the value of technical skills and playing ability.

My advice is to always place skills (techniques and tactics, together with physical skills) in a priority position of importance with respect to all the aspects that can improve already consolidated and very high level motor performance.

Is there a rule change that you want to see turned back?

Rules are the details that put all competitors on the same level: I don't like to challenge a rule.

At this moment there are no rules that negatively affect the execution of the technique, or rules that prevent or limit the tactical strategy or that diminish the spectacle offered by a volleyball match.

If you could have a gigantic billboard anywhere with anything on it — metaphorically speaking, getting a message out to every athlete or coach on the globe — what would it say and why?

“Never stop trying to improve yourself, your team and your work environment”.

I think working in a different way from that described by the aforementioned sentence is frustrating: the motivation that each of us puts at the service of the path to achieve personal, social and sportive goals is contagious and is transmitted in the system, therefore the coach, as a leader, he can’t be successful without having and showing this persistent behaviour.

In the last five years, what new belief, behaviour, or habit has most improved your life?

In the last 6 years I have had the opportunity to be a Serie A coach, to experience the highest level of competition that exists in Italy, even though I have had many experiences of the highest level of international competition.

At the same time I continued to work with the national youth teams.

Those 2 different experiences have had a symbiotic relationship, one aids the other and vice versa.

The transition from a senior coach to a coach of a young talented group, has been enriched both in my method of working and in the tactical content of my practices.

The reverse transition, from the coach of a young talented to being the coach of a team that plays at the highest level of competition, has been enriched in the evaluation and correction of techniques and in the patience necessary to wait for my players to get motivated to change themselves and to improve their personal in game performance.

When you feel overwhelmed or unfocused, or have lost your focus temporarily, what do you do?

My loss of concentration can be caused by two reasons: the first is physical and mental fatigue; the second is a loss of attention and lack of focus.

In the first case I have to concentrate all my energies on a single detail or on the thing I do best; in the second case I have to take a day off and do different things that are not part of my work routine.

Thank you Marco for the time you took to answer our volleybrains questions.



