===== SESSION: https://volleybrains.com/kelly-sheffield/ =====

----- VIDEOS -----
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Yp_-nEHx9SA
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hUteQSOTtjY
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Bmcs1Pdw1UQ
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eVWKHLtNf40
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RcewGwV1XGA
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SZnXkb0bY4o
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_o7bVofnPUI
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PVI2KhCgMmw
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Q6mX5d5GoJs
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ngaaAgXV03g

----- TEXTO -----
15. Kelly Sheffield:'We're trying to max this thing out.'

In this article we feature Kelly Sheffield, head coach for the women's volleyball team at the 'University of Wisconsin'.

We covered a lot of ground in our videocall.

There is a lot of great content in this article. Covering coaching concepts, what Kelly looks for in his players, continuous improvement, the use of data, etc, etc.

For sure check out the YouTube clips that are available; they do a great job at putting an emphasis on what Kelly cares about.

Consider this entire article (with the bonus material) as a masterclass on Kelly's and Wisconson's idea's and concepts. You're a champ if you go through this in one go. I urge you to come back to this article though...that will be the best way to further understand and maybe, hopefully implement it's content.

To end this introduction:

Wisconsin has been a serious contender for that national championship title.

Next season they will be once more.

Enter Kelly...

Kelly, why did you decide to commit to be a professional volleyball coach? What pushed you towards that decision?

I lucked into coaching, I coached at really young ages, 13, 14, 15, 16 year olds. I did some junior high and high school coaching. Did a lot of club coaching, age 16 and lower and I just did every camp I could.

I did college camps all over the place, I'd be in the gym all the time, with my notepad and I would just write everything down of what the coaches were saying, where they positioned their players, the progressions and how they would organise the structure of their practice.

For years I just couldn't get enough of it, I absolutely loved it, but never thought about having that as a career. It was just something I was passionate about.

I was in that space probably for about seven years or so. And then finally, a collegian coach, I had been working her camps for a while, well she said: "You're pretty good at this. And you obviously love it. Have you ever thought about coaching in college'?

I had never thought about that. And she said:" If I get you a job, what would you think?'

So she helped me get my first job at 27 years old.  I vividly remember the first time I walked into that practice gym. I just couldn't believe it. I never played volleyball in high school or college. And to walk in that gym and see the level of athletes and the level of coaching, that just blew me away.

That's been my journey. I've been fortunate enough to be around a lot of elite coaches.

This was never a grand plan. Every job that I've been at I just thought it was so cool that I would sit there and say: 'Man, I could be here for the rest of my life and be happy'.

My first college job, I made $12,000, that's not a lot of money. I was living in Houston, Texas, and that doesn't go very far. But I remember thinking: 'I would pay $12,000 to have the job that I'm having.'

The next job I was at the university of Virginia.

There would be times that I would just be laying in bed, it would be one o'clock in the morning and I couldn't sleep...I was just thinking about volleyball. I would just get up and go the office. Still couldn't believe they gave me the keys to do this. And I just sat there and watched film on the old VHS tapes, all night long.

To me it was like going to Disneyland. It was so much fun that I just felt like that at some point somebody would just walk into my office  and say: 'All right, play time is over. It's time for you to go back home.' :-)

So I've been really appreciative at every step step of the way.

What advice would you give yourself as a starting coach? An advice that is so clear and logic to you now, but that you had to develop over the years?

You think you're a good communicator, but then you look back and you find out that wasn't true.:-)

The effort was there and I tried to do the right thing. But I probably wish I would've done things a little bit different in how I was communicating.

Early on I was probably talking to them, through...what my goals were. Rather than trying to understand what their goals were and trying to help them get to where they're wanting to go.

Another advice is about learning.

I was always a lifelong learner. And I think that's a really important thing.

Curiosity.

I think that's important for any young coach, well any coach, to ask a lot of questions, to be curious, to learn along the way.

But personally, I think I've always had that in me, so probably for myself the best advice must have been to try to get to know our players better, where they're from, what their idea's about the game are, what their goals are.

Do you have a particular goal as a coach? Maybe a goal that you already reached or a goal that is so hard to reach that it gives you daily motivation?

There are lot's of things that we're still wanting here.:-)

We're trying to max this thing out. I want to help our players max out their talent, max out their potential. It's really about them. How do we help them get to their dreams, their goals.

So there's a certain responsibility on us as coaches to be able to help them do that.

And that's why it's critical to continue to learn. How do we help them academically? How do we help them technically? How do we help them win by being better tacticians? How do we be better communicators? How do we help them mentally and emotionally, and give them the resources to be able to do that? But also how do we grow the sport? Get more fans in the stands.

We're going to have summer camps. And we want those to be the best experience that any of these young campers have had at a young age. So we also want to be great at that.

So maxing out is really important.

We're in the BIG10 conference, which is a pretty gnarly league and we want to continue to challenge and compete and hopefully win BIG10 titles. We won the last two.

We feel like we're an elite program, but we haven't won a national championship yet. So that's something that we're wanting to do for our players, that drives us every day. But also for our fan base and our alumni we want to be one of those exclusive few teams.

There's 330, 340 Division 1 teams and I think there's been 11, maybe 12 of them that have ever won a national championship.

We're working hard to try to join that club as well.

According to you, what rule change is necessary in the future? And why would you want to see this new rule implemented?

Obviously when you're talking about the rules, there is a difference between the international rules and the rules that we have here in the States, at least on the women's side. Internationally, there's six substitutions. We have 15.

I would probably like to see something more in the middle of those numbers.

In the States of course we are playing amateur volleyball. Participation is really important. So I think that's a big reason why there are so many subs, there are just so many kids that are playing the sport here in our country.

And if you cut the number of subs down, then you're probably shrinking the team. And if you're shrinking the teams either there are some people that aren't participating or they're moving to a lower team and all of those have a bit lesser experienced coaches, which can be detrimental for the sport also. So there's probably a balance there that's happening.

But yes, for the game it's better to have fewer subs than what we have right now.

Especially with the juniors, there are some kids that just never learn how to pass a ball because they're not asked to. And then they get to college or they get in the international game and they don't have that skill set. And we all know that that's a very critical skill set.

So I'd like to see that number, or at least over here in the States go down, maybe to 10 substitutions or something like that.

I do like the fact that the libero serves over here. I know they can't overseas, but I like that element.

But I'd also like to see some 'six rotation outside hitters' a little bit more than what we're seeing over here. :-)

About 'calls', I think we're heading in the right direction of calling a lot less double contacts, for sure about what the setter can and can't do.

The game at the net is another one, well there are some crazy calls when the ball is up above the net and probably too many of them are wrong. I would want to see that a little bit more open, get the officials out of that call a little bit more.

Let's say if you don't dig the ball off the net or if you dig it off too far, then the setter maybe not have as good of a contact. Just let that go.

Matias: 'I would like to see what would happen when we experiment with a game with no tips, just rolls and hits?' (like Vital Heynen also mentioned in his interview)

I'm glad you said that. I'm okay with the tipping.

But I think the middle blockers that are throwing the ball, that one is really tough to defend. Especially on the quick sets, those throw downs, I'd probably rather get away with it.

Why not ask a silly question also, we had so many serious ones. :-) So, you are Dr. Frankenstein and have the ability to put together the world's most performing volleyball player. Which characteristics do need to stand out for you?

I'm not sure I'm going to come up with anything original on here or something that hasn't been said before. :-)

That's probably not something, when I was recruiting early, where I spent a lot of time on.

You're looking at the physical gifts and what type of person they are and things like that. But how quickly can they pick up something? And a lot of times multi-sport athletes when they're younger, they know their body a little bit better. So things stick to them a little bit more when they're learning things.

I don't know if other people underrated that skill. Certainly I did for a good portion of my career. But that's for sure a really really important one.

There's a rafting shop over at the Colorado river they have a little shed with a sign that says that.

Meaning if you go overboard on your rafts, don't just wait for the raft to come to get you, you've also got to swim to it, be an active participant in your own rescue.

And so if you're not happy with your playing time, well do something about it. Don't be a victim. If you're not happy with your lot in life, go and do something about it.

For sure those aren't the top qualities that we're looking for in having a new player, I mean their physical abilities are critical of course, but I think those 2 are some of the things that can separate people.

What volleyball match did really stand out to you, which game solidified volleyball as your 'calling'.

There's so many. I was hooked right from the beginning. The school that I started out with, I was a junior varsity assistant coach at a high school that had won a lot of state championships, they were winning it year after year. And I was blown away by that.

I was blown away by my first college matches as an assistant coach. I remember we went out to Hawaii and there were 8,000 fans in the stands, the most I'd ever seen before...that would have been a couple hundred people. And so to be able to participate in that was unbelievable to me.

There's been some great Olympic matches along the way. But anything in particular, I don't know. So many great games that have been played.

Again, about being a lifelong learner, who knows what games we're still able to see.

When preparing your next match, how does your general approach look like and did you ever change your approach? Why did you change and was the outcome beneficial?

There's video of course, for sure Data Volley and Volleymetrics have really changed the equation with preparing our matches.

We would go into our film room and give our players the scouting report and show them the clips that we wanted to show them.

And that was fine. It condensed the time in doing video, we gave them the information that we thought they needed to have, and then we would go out there and play.

If things didn't go the way like we've laid it out to them, some of our players were having challenges with that or weren't able to change course in the middle of the match. They knew the game plan. But if things went away from the game plan, I think we had a tough time.

One of the things that we started doing different a couple of years ago to tackle that was the coaches would go and watch the film and we'd have our own kind of scouting report.

But instead of showing the players the clips that we wanted to show them, we showed them a bunch, let's say somebody is hitting, maybe we'd show them 30 or 40 swings. And our players would talk out loud what they were seeing.

They'd have a conversation as we were just watching this same player, hit ball after ball after ball after ball. And for our group that was the game changer, because then they could have some perspective. It wasn't that this player couldn't hit this particular shot, but she only hits this shot one out of every 30 times.

This framed things a little bit better for our players. And so when something that we didn't show them happened with our earlier reports, they didn't have the right perspective and they just thought:' Wait a minute, I didn't know she could do this, or worse, the coaches were wrong.'

But now with them participating and maybe seeing a more general overview, there's a little bit better perspective.

There is more dialogue with our scouting and with our film sessions. There is a lot more back and forth and discussion rather than us, coaches, just being in front of the class, telling them. (for sure check out the 1st clip at the end of this article)

Obviously all of this takes a little bit more time, so we'll start that earlier in the week. And maybe we'll do hitting on one day and we'll do rotations on another day and then we'll do their defense on day three and then day four we're off and playing.

Matias: Yes, 'active' participation can be of great help and can even be essential in some cases. In pro leagues or the VNL for example (which was going on during our interview) you've got players on your own national team that will know the opponent better than their own national team coaching staff can. They've played against each other during the season maybe even were on the same pro team together...

Exactly the information some players have on each other, for sure going in and out of national team, playing pro, playing the VNL needs to be used. All incredible useful information.

Matias: How to handle all that information becomes the most important issue.

It's a challenge, you're right. Not just the amount of video, but the amount of stats, that was a real challenge for us early on.

We've had these big bundles of paper, this package of information on your opponents and in the early days I remember getting all this information, and asking myself what do I do with all this stuff?

As a coach you have to be able to sit back and say:

What is critical for right now

What is critical to give to our players

What is information that needs to be pushed to evaluate after the season

With the current technology boom, that has been for sure a challenge.

You have to take care of yourself first. You have to know yourself, because there is nothing more important than being ready to play and knowing yourself.

Once you've established that, then you earned the right to get information on your opponent.

Some players, especially younger players, for them it's too much just thinking about what they've got to do, you really don't want to pile on anything else.

We tend to obviously keep information about our opponents pretty short at the beginning of the year. We want to minimize the amount of information for our younger players.

And then, once they start operating in a space where they're more comfortable, where they're not just analyzing all the time in the matches, but they're playing the matches. Then we'll give you a little bit more.

I've probably been as guilty as anybody at piling on too much information to our players.

The more information we get as coaches, which has happened year after year, I find myself giving less to our players because I've realized that they play more free when receiving less information.

How has a failure, or apparent failure, set you up for later success? Do you have a “favorite failure” of yours?

I don't know if I look at things as failures too much.

I look at it as 'I wish I could've been better for my team, I wish I could've been better for my staff and how can I be better for my team and how can I be better for my staff?'

I have that constantly running inside of my head, I'm just trying to figure out how we can be better.

I know there have been plenty of matches where I look back at now and I say, I was a barrier to our team reaching its potential or winning this match. Not only that, not only did my team have to play our opponents and beat them, they also had to play against me because I got in their way.

I probably was too emotional in the middle of matches, for a good portion of my career. It's all right to make barriers at times, or create barriers in practice, but you don't want to be creating barriers for your team in matches.

Those are things I've tried to be better at. Train them the way that you need to in the gym. And then at the very least get out of their way in matches or if possible, try to be on their side, try to help them and get rid of garbage talk, things that just don't matter.

Never 'talking to talk' or judging them in the middle of a play.

I don't know if those are necessarily regrets, but those are things that I've certainly have had to get better at over the course of my career.

Matias: A follow up question is, how did you figure out that you were doing the things you were doing. Right now with the VNL, we've got these great images of the time-outs and I guess that a lot of coaches would/ should be studying their own time-outs. How were you able to catch you own 'mistakes'.

I don't know if it's been challenging for me to know, because I come from a place where I'm not trying to blame our players.

If we're not a great passing team then I haven't recruited properly, maybe we haven't trained it. Maybe we haven't been clear enough on our key points or on our progressions.

If we're not communicating properly as a team then that's on me. I haven't rewarded that.

So I think it mostly comes back to that we're missing something.

I hear coaches quite a bit and they're blaming their players for this, they're blaming them for that. Saying stuff like - 'We just were making dumb mistakes.'

Then do something in practice to eliminate that, find ways to do it.

If we play a match, and I don't think we play at the level that we should have then why is that? What is it that I've done or I have not done to get to that.

And an awful lot, too many times, it's come back to how I've communicated, either going into the match or during the match.

So coming back to your question, acknowledging my 'workpoints' wasn't difficult for me. Probably because I go and look for them; all the time.

About the international game, what players are examples for your athletes? Would you be able to make a 'best starting six' with international players in there?

I see the women's game moving closer and closer towards the men's game. I love the rallies of the women's game.

On offense, everything that happens at the net becomes closer and closer to the men's game. We'll certainly watch the men's game just to get a grasp of where it's going.

The study of players with our own players happens with the women's game though. So that was maybe the only great thing about COVID, that we had a delayed season (Matias: instead of playing in the fall, their season moved to spring - for our Euro readers ;-) )

So a lot of the fall was watching international players, getting on a zoom call with our athletes and just breaking down what some of those pro's are doing. Studying players by position.

Zhu Ting, Paula Egonu, KYK (Kim Yeon-Koung), Haak. Those are some elite players. Joanna Wołosz is also something else. Carlini is obviously going to be one of my starting six players as well.

But what would be my starting six? I don't know.

What I love about Volleymetrics is that it allows us to see almost all matches. And being able to watch them with our players is really helping them elevate their games and their minds, just their observation, their vision of what is possible.

Do you have a book that you like a lot? Which lessons did you get out of it?

We're going to try and get our hands on about anything that's going to help us. :-)

A book that I really enjoyed and it's one that we've had our team read also is called the 'Confidence code'. The focus of the book is about why does confidence around junior high (13-15 years old) climb at a higher rate with boys than we see with girls.

One of the things that we're wanting is that we want our players to be the most confident people on the planet. And we want to learn how can we help them do that.

So we've had our players all read it, we've had one-on-one discussions that have been really powerful and meaningful and also helpful to our coaches. We've had team discussions about it.

One of our players, Dana Rettke, said that every person on the planet should be reading this book. I think it's something that really helped them.

It boils down to how to take reasonable risks and how to communicate in the best way.

This book has impacted a lot of people in our program.

What advice would you give to a smart, driven young coach about to enter the  “professional coaching world”?

I got started and was fortunate to start at the Munciana volleyball club, a club that is very good at the juniors level, we had some really good coaches at the time.

We would all get together at our coaching meetings, talking over methods and concepts. And how these coaches went about things were all very different, but they all had a lot of success.

There was this sharing of ideas that I really enjoyed. And then I was able to watch these coaches go out and execute and they all went about things a little bit differently.

I would also just pick up the phone, after I read something that a coach talked about in an article, I would call them, tell them they don't know me but that I was really curious about something they said. And then spending the next 40 minutes on the phone with them while they're explaining their philosophy to me.

That sharing of idea's. I just really loved that.

But somewhere along the line, at least here in this country, we developed this idea that there was only one way of doing certain things.

And I just, I wholeheartedly disagree with that. Like the old saying goes 'there's a lot of ways to skin a cat'.

Being open to different ways is really important. And not regurgitating what somebody else says or what they had done. We've done the research and this is IT and everybody blindly follows that...I don't agree with that at all.

In the last few years, what is a method or practice that you changed or added and how did that play out?

We try to get our players to be strong competitors, we want players that want to compete and that are driven to win.

And not just on match day, but to also win the 'moments' in practices. But then at times, we'd have some players that would be 'redlining'. Like with a car, the RPM's get too high and in going too far the engine starts smoking.

Trying to balance that out we dove into mindfulness, we've got a mindfulness coach right now that has been helping us.

If you play a five set match. You could have 250 points that are scored, which means a lot of time between points. So in those moments what you are telling yourself is really critical. If you're just running hot and just getting hotter and hotter as the match goes on you're going to make some errors along the way.

So how can you balance that competitive drive in that fight, but also be able to calm things down.

I'm going to be able to read the game better if I'm able to balance those two areas out.

We've tried to give them the skills that we think are necessary for that. Chad, our mindfulness coach has helped quite a few players.

Matias: Digging a bit deeper, from a practical side of things, could you give some examples?

He talks about 'the eye of the hurricane'. That's where we are at a lot, there's all of this stuff going on around you, but in the center of it is calmness. And that's where we're wanting to be.

When we get to the NCAA tournament we'll use it to be able to slow our minds down so we can get a good night's rest.

But then there's other times during a match, for example going back to serve, a deep breath would slow things down. Maybe after you shank a pass, you're wiping your hands on your shorts, and that could be a routine that centers you.

So what he is doing is not just saying, this is what you want to do. He's wanting to give them a lot of different options and find what is best for you.

It's going to differ person by person. It's what you're responding to.

Those are ways that we use mindfulness, but the same goes for communication. Using the right communication skills makes our players learn about themselves and each other, the way we communicate with each other is to bring out the best of the person next to you on court.

So if you're a results oriented person, if you're somebody that is all about the results, and you're running pretty high, and somebody comes up to you and says, 'hey man, you need to calm down'. That results oriented person is going to want to punch you in the face. :-) It's like: 'What do you mean calm down! I'm in the fight. I feel great where I'm at'.

Or somebody else that is saying 'calm down', maybe that's what they need to center themselves.

So how do we communicate in a way to bring out the best in each other is another area that we tend to spend a lot of time on, especially during the off season.

But during the entire season we'll dive into leadership, communication, behavioural styles. How do we pull on all those strings to bring out the best in the person next to us.

When you feel overwhelmed or unfocused, or have lost your focus temporarily, what do you do?

No, I don't get overwhelmed. Having a family certainly balances you out.

I remember after a match where we didn't play well, or we had lost, I'd be really consumed with that.

The first time my kid came running up to me and gave me a hug, I'm sure all coaches of young kids have this, you learn really quickly that your kid doesn't care whether you won or lost. They just want to hug you. They just want to play with you.

And I think that centers me and has been real critical to never get overwhelmed.

When it's time to work, it's working time. And then when I'm around my kids, we're going to play around and I'm going to try not to think about work 'quite as much'. :-).

Some bonus material

Clip of Kelly with his starting setter Sydney Hilley. Assessing the opponents block and their own offensive game. All this goes back to what Kelly talked about above, high participation of your own players(of course essential with your setter) when breaking down game tape.

2. Clip about 'how to mentor players'. Some key frameworks in there; and stick in there for those last seconds, always end with 🔥. ;-)

3. This last clip is a bit longer (and older). But it's a good showcase of progressions and ties in with the 'ability to learn' of your athlete, as mentioned in the article. I'm a fan of 1m:24, the exaggeration move as a set-up for the work to come.

Thanks for reading.

Small note at the end:

As always the emphasis with the volleybrains articles is to make you think about your own coaching style. Implement a few changes that seem interesting, discuss with your fellow coaches, ...

If you read the entire article in one go, I also urge you to come back to it in a few days. You'll discover new bits or you remember things that were important to you but you already forgot about.

As many coaches and Kelly mentioned, there is no 1 way...develop your own ways. I'm sure the volleybrains articles can give a hand.

Enjoy your day,

Matias



