===== SESSION: https://volleybrains.com/tommi-tiilikainen/ =====

----- VIDEOS -----
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vh3ZNix-wwA
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oLLkEBefL7E
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Y3Xnx1GITZc
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nQl3kO9tUPc
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=A2YgRjPFUXw
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jL_OCCd-UHY

----- TEXTO -----
16. Tommi Tiilikainen:'I try to break and take off all limitations.'

Hi readers, this article features Tommi Tiilikainen. Tommi is a 34 year old Finnish volleyball coach who has coached in Europe, just had a 4 year stint in Japan and is now coaching the South Korean champions Incheon Korean Air Jumbos (btw the team that Roberto Santilli coached last season)

Tommi isn't a coach who chooses the common path. But he very meticulously tries to understand, debunk and reframe the coaching of our game. This will become clear while you read the article and watch the clips. Of course communication is also a big chapter today, as coaching in Asia needs some initial adaptation.

Enjoy this one. Just this...when you watch a video clip you can skip the text til the next question, because that will be the transcription of the video.(but reread if you like)

Enter Tommi...

Tommi, what pushed you towards coaching volleyball?

Well, my father was a coach and my both parents were PE teachers. I did basically all the sports there are while I was growing up, not just volleyball.

I was starting volleyball at a really early age, probably somewhere in the backyard with my dad, you know, starting out with pepper.

Volleyball was something I would do throughout my youth years. My plan was to become a player. That was super clear to me already as a kid.

I got injured when I was 18. And after that I just could not figure out a way how to stay and be healthy and still play volleyball.

I had a bad back and that basically sidelined me forever. I could play some recreational volleyball after, but basically when I was 18, I needed to figure out what was next?

And then, well, long story short, I came back to volleyball after trying different things. Probably like three, four years later.

At that moment in time I decided that coaching was what I wanted to do.

Yes, it took a long time for me to figure that out. It was not a clear thing. I was not thinking: 'I'm going to stay in volleyball'. But I was happy I found my spot as a coach.

So you went from coaching a Finnish team to Düren in Germany. How did that come about?

I was working for the Finnish Federation for different youth national teams for a couple of years. Then I got the opportunity to take over a team in Finland when I was 25.

You know the Finnish league isn't a professional league but that team ran like a full pro team.

So I was four years there. Then I got the chance to go to Germany. After Düren Anders (Kristiansson) gave me a chance to come check out Asian volleyball with him. So I did four years in Japan and now I'm in Korea.

The German league to the Japanese league, that is an uncommon jump, how did that come about?

The connection came like this. I was looking for a libero for my team in Finland and Anders was helping one of the Japanse libero's (Taichiro Koga)to get connected in Europe.

In the end Taichiro came over to play for us for one season and the connection with Anders got made.

Here on volleybrains we have an interview coming up with Joop Alberda, now head of the Dutch volleyball federation, but for sure even better known for winning Olympic gold in Atlanta 1996 with the Netherlands.

When asked for his main 'mentors' in the early days he answered that both Doug Beal and Anders Kristiansson were big examples for him.

The jump you made to Japan was that influenced a lot because you could work together with Anders?

Both were equally positive. It was a super win-win. Already years back, one of the things I wanted, was to work in Asia, I wanted to work in Japan.

Plus Anders was there to teach me everything he learned over decades and decades of coaching volleyball. So it was a really fantastic combination.

Every two, three weeks, we have a two or three-hour call. We always stay in touch. He became a really good friend for me. We have a great connection.

And about Japan, you know, it was a great opportunity whatever way you look at it.

My wife and me, we like to travel, we really liked the idea of going to a different country, getting to know a new culture. Also now in South Korea, that's what we like, these new adventures.

Asia is not Europe, of course, what jumps out the most while coaching over there?

Obviously communication is difficult. You work through a translator most of the times. It's really difficult to connect with people the same way like in Europe or in general if you have a common language. So that's a difficult part, but it's also a nice challenge.

If I work in Europe, I would say that communication is one of my strong points. But working in Asia, it just basically becomes my weakness. That's a tough one.

But things like the facilities, the whole setup for training playing volleyball. That is amazing. It's just unbelievable. It's like being in a volleyball heaven, basically. It's fantastic. How great all the gyms are and how everything works well.

You can just focus on working.

One big difference to European volleyball is that when you play home or away. It's exactly the same. There is no advantage in Asia, everybody is very polite. :-)

If I would put everything on a paper, there are SO many positive things. My wife and me, we love it here.

Japanese volleyball can be considered 'company' volleyball, what are some of your insights there?

In my understanding there's three 'setups' of volleyball.

One is professional leagues. One is university leagues or some sort of university system.

And then there's a company volleyball system, which is Japan.

I have not seen the university system. One day I would hope to see it. Right now I have experience in professional leagues and what is 'company volleyball'.

The players sign with a company and they play volleyball. And when they finish, they continue to work in the company. It's a cool model.

You can say many things about it, but there's lots of good things about it also. In Europe, what happens to some athletes when they finish? They are not finding their place or know what to do. In a way it's a failsafe.

Going back to communication, were there some extra inputs or cues you used, or everybody getting used to the interpreter was enough?

How do you want to communicate your message? Through speaking, through writing, using some Google translate, showing videos. I'm going to try to use everything.

I could not speak Japanese, but I know a couple of words, so I could try to make somebody smile a least.

I want to just try to find a way to get my message across, trying to find a way to figure out who this human being in front of me is. :-)

And this is not so easy if you don't have the same language.

It was easy to go to Japan with Anders being there already for four years.

He would do English studies for the guys and they would have some level of English. I was there four years and obviously everybody gets better and better at English.

The last year we actually worked without a translator. So I would have the captains translating, the staff members translating. That was interesting. A really interesting challenge. Obviously, there were some miscommunications, there are some weird situations, there were some 'broken phone' situations going on, but we made it work in the end. :-)

It was pretty good. Obviously Anders made this all possible with instilling this new culture.

What advice would you give yourself as a starting coach? An advice that is so clear and logic for you now, but that you had to develop over the years.

You need to find your 'inner why'. If you have your clear why and you have a clear understanding what the direction is that you're going and hopefully you can make all your decisions with the end in mind.

It's like Stephen Covey talks about in his book, that was a book that really made an impact on me years and years ago, he talked about 'starting with the end in mind'.

('7 habits of highly effective people' Habit 2: Start with the end in mind)

Obviously I don't know myself a hundred percent. I don't know if you can, but that's something I have a clear idea about. What I want to leave behind is something on my mind every day.

(Matias here: Tommi and me did rift on what 'legacy' means for the both of us and came to the same conclusion...)

This is not some legacy 'look at me thing', it's for sure NOT that. To have a concrete example, if I can shape the future of volleyball in some beneficial way or form than my work is done.

I never want to be in the headlines or whatever. Being in service of our sport is what it's all about.

Do you have a particular goal as a coach? Maybe a goal that you already reached or a goal that is so hard to reach that it gives you daily motivation?

Obviously when I work for a team, I want to provide good results for that team and help them to achieve, their goals; basically...why they hire me.

But from an individual point of view, it's not about the results. It's really about breaking old ways of thinking. I'm not into having big traditions in sports. In some ways, yes of course.

But there are so many different traditional things in volleyball. I hope to break some of them and just do new stuff and find a reason why something works better than something else.

I'm sure that if you watch volleyball in 30 years, it's going to be so different. Very simple, but correct comparison... if you today watch volleyball from 30 years ago, it is super different also. It will again transform into something else.

The goal is to take away some old ways of thinking. AND to try to empower the individuals.  That's a big topic, but that's just the answer. If I can spread individual thinking, on and off the court, I would really enjoy that.

Some topics we talk about will become clear, very quickly. Some ideas, maybe somebody else or me will remember our conversation and will figure it out in 30 years. And we'll go: 'Oh yeah. This conversation.' And it just clicks.

Another clear goal though is this...

As a player, you would want to join. You're like: 'I want to be part of this stuff. This looks cool.'

And then as a spectator, you're like: 'I want to see this team. I want to see what they come up with next week or this season.'

That's how I see it.

The future of volleyball, how will the game evolve according to your opinion? Or what are you hoping for that the game will look like in a couple of decades?

The ball will travel faster. It will not travel faster from reception or defense, maybe in some cases even there.

Offense will be, maybe not faster than what the setters are doing now, but it will be faster from anybody setting, basically having six setters on the court and everybody providing the same skills.

It's a constant battle of how many hands on block you can create, the fewer hands you can have against the attacker. That's something that already is happening. There's not only one setter on the court anymore. If you watched the VNL, for example, you saw that.

There are lots of setters on the court. For sure that's one thing.

Then just adding new skillsets, that's also happening now already, all the time.

New serve skills, new ways to kill the ball in attack. There's new variations on setting. There's new variations for tactics.

On the serving part, you see guys hitting spins, hitting spin to floats, hitting float-floats, hitting float-spins, all different variations. And everything is much about... this is something Anders was talking about already years ago...

So that goes for sure for the offensive part of volleyball. The better the players are it's much more about reading, seeing the details, finding the cues from the opponent.

And then can you look the same and do many things from that same look.

The better you read the better you understand, it goes layers and layers deep. Can you find 2-touch solutions? Can you find fake hit set solutions? Can you find new patterns in the game? You just find those new patterns because you want to create a moment of surprise for the opponent.

With less hands you have a better chance of killing the ball, in theory at least, if you control what you're doing.

So I'm just finding different ways. Always staying one step ahead of the opponent.

I guess some teams have systems for these things. I guess some teams allow players to create their own freestyles. So in any way that will keep happening for sure. More and more and more, and it will break the frame of what is volleyball.

(Matias here: this is of course not only happening in men's volleyball in the 2nd set of Serbia - Italy in the female quarter finals of the Tokio Olympics we saw Pietrini make a huge leap forward from behind the 3 meter line giving a (let's call it) N'Gapeth style backset to Bosetti...Bosetti hit out, but details, details...people)

Volleyball is not 'bump-set-spike' only. Many times it is, but it can be so much more too.

Then I think the big thing, what I want to see, I hope there's a time and place for this, but I really think teams will start playing without a libero. You would want to put all the physicality and all the speed on offense.

So you'll go back to the times when you played with five attackers. That will be offense mayhem.

I think then you'll also try to create new roles. It's not the conventional volleyball rules anymore. Maybe you need to create a hybrid role or a mix of different roles on the court.

I just see a big advantage of having five attackers. Or if you're able to hit with the second touch, like potentially it's six attackers against three blockers.

I like that.

We are talking about elite volleyball here, new tides mostly always start at the elite level and slowly start showing up elsewhere. Of course for example, a junior, high school coach reading this... they just can't skip the foundational development of our game...

Well first of all, how I start to answer.

That should be the mentality of again, a perfect world. You test out different positions also, in a way that you understand how it feels.

You have a bit of empathy for different positions. Over the years, we would do some empathy training in a way, we would mess around. Everybody playing different positions. So you get an idea about how it feels.

Not everybody knows that it's not so easy to be a passer when somebody's hammering balls or it's not so easy to be a setter. It's a tough role. You're running the offense and, you know, things get sticky. It's a very different role than being a middle blocker or being an opposite.

Or you know, the opponent is passing well and you're a middle, I mean it's not fun always.

But going back to your question.

I mean, it's easier said than done. But let's make sure everybody knows all the skills. That means we've got to learn these skills a little bit faster and earlier.

I think that in the future, I don't even know what it looks like, but you can use technology in a way that you get boosted training, learning environments in which people learn these skills, but way faster. So also break that limit.

Not to be like, 'to learn this skill it takes 10,000 hours'.

Maybe not, maybe there's a way to boost feedback, understand the movements way faster and essentially get better, faster.

Technology will have a big part in this.

Best game you've ever seen. Very simple, what recent or game from the volleyball vaults did validate once more that volleyball is the greatest sport on the globe for you.

I got to say that...I don't know. I was thinking about this a lot if there's a game I want to highlight, but no, not really.

Volleyball in general. It's just amazing. I love to watch different games and every game is a different story and it unfolds in different ways. So, no, I don't have one. There would be too many.

When preparing a new game (next weekend), how does your general approach look like and did you ever change your approach? Why did you change and was the outcome beneficial?

So I need to figure out a way how the players are comfortable when they are entering the court...not to please the coach, they need to know what to do, they need to feel comfortable, how they bring their best game.

I think that's what it is. I try different things and sometimes I really mess it up. I have made some terrible preparations, sometimes it's too much, sometimes it's too little. :-)

But for sure every year there's a routine. I try to twitch it in some way. But basically in the end what is the end goal:

There's some guy who needs to know just one thing to be ready to play the game and if that's so, that's enough.

Circling back to the language barrier, because starting out in South Korea right now brings a new language with it, are their other ways you implement to get around that?

In Japan, for example, what we did last year was that the players made the meeting. The coaches prepped the players, so they know what they are presenting. But we would have position leaders who are doing the meetings. We would rotate around.

In the end this was also a way to create leaders.

If you work in a country where you don't speak the language and if I make a 30 minute meeting, you know, it's double the time or it's a triple time with the translator doing his thing. That becomes an one-hour meeting versus somebody else who talks the language.

What is an unusual habit or an absurd thing that you love?

I like to wear shorts, that's my thing...

(Matias here; should we get rid of this question? Give me some feedback. I mean, I wasn't waiting for this answer. haha)

How has a failure, or apparent failure, set you up for later success? Do you have a “favorite failure” of yours?

Well yeah, like I mentioned earlier, getting injured and finish playing - that felt terrible at the time but it opened a new chapter in my life, found my wife and got into coaching early.

Do you have a book that you like a lot? Which lessons did you get out of it?

I'm reading less, but listening more and more to audiobooks.

These 3 books have been fundamental or at least interesting to me.

Legacy (James Kerr)

Win Forever (Pete Carroll)

The Score Takes Care of Itself (Bill Walsh)

But about knowledge and sharing, I think it's really about communicating and networking, talking to different people in volleyball. But also, outside of volleyball, it's important for me not to only stay in our volleyball bubble.

What advice would you give to a smart, driven young coach about to enter the  “professional coaching world”?

Basically all that we covered here today.

Find a mentor

Create a network of coaches to stay in touch with

Prepare your show

Is there a rule change that you want to see turned back? Or what rule change is necessary in the future? And why would you want to see it implemented?

If you compare to other sports, our product is more difficult to sell to people.  It has lots of breaks and before rally scoring, you would not even come close to knowing when a game would be finished.

That's changed now. One thing to make this product better, well, you want to have less timeouts, more action. Let's play more volleyball and less watching guys huddle up, watching challenges, etc.

I'm sure this is something that all the coaches were talking about. Just less breaks.

Other than that. I like the retro rule of bringing back 'block the serve'. That would be amazing. :-) I don't know how that would be used.

The only other thing, but it's also the same thing. I liked the idea of being able to touch the net. If it doesn't interfere with the game, at least. Just not being able to touch the top tape, that should stay a mistake.

I think it was really a good rule.

You don't finish a good rally because somebody is  touching the net, 'a little bit'.

What should be the rule on double touches or lifts?  I guess there's different ways, how referees whistle those things in different countries. But there, I don't know. I really don't know what is the best.

For me this is about the technology, again. In the future, I guess there will be a moment that there's no need for a human referee.

When you have good enough technology things will become, black and white. Then you can set it up. What is the limit of how much you can touch the ball? There will be clear standard.

And I'm not pushing for strict rules either, let me be clear on that, I love how now you have speed and you're pushing and manipulating the ball in all different ways.

But to be honest, nobody knows what is too much or what is too little. It's just about how the referee sees it. Plus it's impossible for the referee to know what is too long and what is not, it's impossible.

As long as there are human beings being referees, one part of volleyball is that, there's going to be wrong calls and I mean, it's okay. It must be okay.

If you could have a gigantic billboard anywhere with anything on it — metaphorically speaking, getting a message out to every athlete or coach on the globe — what would it say?

So you’re telling me there is a chance? (Dumb and Dumber) :-)

When you feel overwhelmed or unfocused, or have lost your focus temporarily, what do you do? (If helpful: What questions do you ask yourself?)

Call a friend

Go for a run

Ask myself: 'Why do I do what I do'

Thanks Tommi for your time and answers. 👍

Readers, viewers...

Next article(in 2 weeks) will be with Tuomas Sammelvuo, head coach of the Russian Men's National team. But let him first get that medal (I didn't say which kind of 'metal', so you can't say I jinxed it.)

7th of August update: So it's a 🥈 one for Russia. 10 sets of nerve racking volleyball were enough for today.😅  What a way for Laurent Tillie to end his coaching career.

My totally 'non' data driven analytics tell me that the top 5 men's national teams have never been closer together than they are at this moment in time.

Gearing up for the women's finals...and sharing this clip of Karch after Team USA's semifinal win.

This is what coaching is all about...beautiful.

Enjoy your weekend,

Matias

P.S.: Both Instagram (still empty for now) and YouTube will get more and more content, give it a follow if you want.



