===== SESSION: https://volleybrains.com/tuomas-sammelvuo/ =====

----- VIDEOS -----
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=onENaXf0VXI
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kRR2R-IaZOs
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XnGdmwkloOM
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=N5NGTs_kvFo
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KIsnSFV2H90
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3zbjm0NbARY
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8Lcu2YoQ2zg
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XBZTPtENQCY
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3CcUqN4DmLk
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TwrDhmWW_Tw
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tRQ4M3bDz6E

----- TEXTO -----
17. Tuomas Sammelvuo:'Your best players are the ones that make the culture, they are the foundation of your team.'

With the Russian National Men's team Tuomas Sammelvuo just won the Olympic Silver medal🥈. We had a talk with him after the VNL tournament in July a few days before leaving to Tokio.

Tuomas Sammelvuo had an extensive and successful playing career both on club level as with his Finnish national team. In 2013 he started to coach and became the head coach of the Finnish national team, soon afterwards also club volleyball in the Russian Superleague. From 2019 he's the head coach of the Russian national team. Won the VNL in 2019 and just won a well deserved Olympic Silver medal at the Tokio Olympics

Enter Tuomas...

Tuomas, when did you started to coach? What were the first lessons that you learned?

I started to coach the national team of Finland immediately after my playing career. You coach the guys that you lived with for 10 years in the same room. And I think authority it's just not something, that is giving to you.

You have to earn that respect. You have to earn that authority. You have to show that you care. Because I might know everything about volleyball, but if I can't make you to execute, it means nothing.

I like to also put the players in different kinds of categories, I'm thinking that the average players, normal players, they don't want to be coached too much.

Good players they want coaching. They want you to help them.

I think when you start to coach, you use the methods from the coaches that you liked, and then as a beginner coach, you want to speak too much.

You want to show that, you know something and you want get that knowledge out.

Sometimes nobody's just listening to you. :-) My first half year was not easy to say the least.

We watched our time outs and what I was saying, what kind of reaction I got from the players? God, there's a huge learning process.

You have to be open to learn, be humble to learn. I think everybody's saying the same things, but really, that is also my experience. And this never has to end.

And also your players are so very different. Like I'm explaining something very detailed to somebody, and he's sleeping already and somebody else just wants more details. Somebody else just can't stand those details. :-)

This is a fantastic job.

Yeah, I'm still a very young coach, but if I think how was I on those first days? I hope I'm different.

Every day is a different day. Even if the schedule is the same. Yeah. It has been really great and fascinating, difficult, hard. I love this.

Exactly what you mention about the time outs in the VNL we saw a broad range of different styles of time-outs. Some great ones, other more questionable. But a lot of different coaching styles to say the least...

You also have to take the different cultures into account here.

In Russia for example there needs to be one leader, the system is build like that, that’s what the people are used to...the USA time-outs, you see 4 coaches, interacting with everybody.

I’m not saying that one is better than the other, but they are all different, that's for sure.

Over here they would say, you are the coach, you have to lead, keep the full responsibility otherwise you are not a ‘strong’ leader. These different cultures make our sport so very interesting.

You can for sure get more done in a time out if you can take the setters to yourself and you still have 2 other coaches talking about offense and receiving lines, for example. But it needs to be something that players except. Otherwise it doesn’t work.

An important one in time outs is also not to ‘say something to say something’. You also don’t want to over analyse, you have to give your players some freedom also.

Then again, we are all human, I remember one time with the Russian national team I was really angry, screamed at them even...also that can work.

You could need that reaction, they get angry on you and they react towards the opponent. But it’s for sure not a tool you try and use sometimes. It needs to be genuine.

It’s all about being genuine.

If you try to be somebody that you are not, everybody will immediately (or eventually) recognize that and it won’t have any effect.

The short term effect isn’t worth the long term damage.

Controlling these emotions is important. Not being able to execute your game plan is an issue, but it happens. When you play the game the preparation is long done. You had a week to train, to adapt to your opponent, to get ready for the game.

During the game it’s possible to react, find alternative solutions, some extra details...but the players play.

You can redirect the direction of the boat, but the players will still have to row, exactly.

And that’s where internal leadership comes in.

How do the players interact with each other. When you’re crushing your opponent, players start to loosen their attention...well a few balls later the opponent is already there. That’s how the rally point system works.

You can really see in our time-outs who the leaders are, that’s very interesting.

You have a rather young team, with some more experienced players, but on average very young. All playing at a high level. How do you see that internal leadership working in your case?

Yes, that’s a big chapter and it of course differs team by team.

You can have quiet and experienced players that don’t talk a lot but when they open their mouth everybody listens.

In my case it’s about responsibility. I’m wanting a lot from my best players, there are 3-4 guys where if things are not going I will be very direct or strong with.

I expect a lot from them, like they expect a lot from me. It’s easy to get angry or strict with your youngest players, the easiest victims, but those ways never worked in the past and never will work in the future.

Those players are golden. They hold the dressing room together.

Everybody is different though, so it’s for sure all easier said than done. In the national team I had a lot of talks with our players…

They must be able to except a different kind of role in the national team than they have in their club.

Nearly always they are on the court, no matter what, but in the national team it's not like this.

You can be a player that has to come in from the bench. You have to accept that role.

In general talking about leadership, maybe in your club you have the support that you don’t find in the national team or vice versa. Our players have to be highly adaptable. The VNL was very useful.

Of course, volleyball wise, you see the technical things to improve, but the bubble for sure brought a new kind of synergy in between our players also.

The top contenders for the Olympic medals rotated and experimented a lot during the VNL. For sure you, Russia, did the same, but there was also a lot of structure to be seen. Same couples starting, same starting 6’s for some games. Are there some takeaways there?

I think in the Olympic year, you can do a lot of things. Every player of our roster wants to be in the Olympics. And we had 16 players in the VNL from those 12 go to the Olympics.

Of course you can see that there was a lot of anxiousness about making it or not.

So maybe you are a little bit more worried about your mistakes. Of course we rotated a lot and played more ‘fixed’ towards the end.

We had to do that in my opinion, because now after the VNL we don’t have anymore games. In the same time, you don’t want to kill the players physically, because it's a very hard tournament and you still want to get some practices in also.

The good thing was that the Russian Volleyball Federation decided to finish the league the 10th of April, especially for our preparation.

So we got almost one month off for our players. Glad, we could do that.

Anyway, I don't know what is right or wrong way concerning the player rotations etc. We did it like this. You could see Poland rotating a lot of players, Brazil played more or less with the same starting six, France rotated a lot...

We'll see in the Olympics, I for sure liked this kind of preparation.

Even having some stuff not working out, having doubts about some situations isn’t a bad thing, you should experiment a bit. Evaluate possible problems and outcomes. Once you hit the Olympics you also have to be ready for that.

Of course, it was a long tournament in quarantine. But a nice experience. I think a better preparation than that in conditions of COVID weren’t possible. We for sure used the VNL to give playing time to everybody, but also to define the team for the Olympics.

How did you go about selecting your Olympic players. Having 16 players in the VNL, only taking 12 to the Olympics so 5, maybe 6 players aren’t sure of their participation.

I know that some players know that they will go. But the players that don't know they want to do so much on the court to show themselves, but in the same time, they have to have that confidence that positivity and calmness to play.

Also being a substitute instead of playing all the time, like in the club is a different thing. So also to find those players, that to be in the six, you play all the time, then if it doesn't go, comes the substitute, but that guy needs to change the game.

And the VNL also for that was interesting to experience.

But now the choices are made. So I think also for the coach, I feel pretty easy now because the choices are made.

It's a terrible job to choose and tell somebody who has put it all in for two months to be there.

And then it's like: 'You don't go'. But we have to be honest and it's part of the job, not to have a too long conversation also because when you tell something like that, it's very tough news for everybody.

So explain it, tell them why and move on.

Back to our questions, you were an international successful volleyball player. But what pushed you towards wanting to become a coach.

I was already preparing myself.

I was, I think for 20 years, the captain of the (Finnish) national team. And I think I already had the kind of leadership and interest for that.

I was always helping the coaches, especially in Finland. I had a passion for that, it was a step that I wanted to make, but I could never know that it would happen like this.

And to start immediately as the head coach of our (Finnish)national team was also very risky, very risky. I did put all pluses and minuses on a paper. There were for sure some doubts also.

I was still planning to play maybe one or two years in Novosibirsk and be like a player-coach stay there maybe as a coach of the second team or something.

And then this just happened. Of course I couldn't say no.

In hindsight it was exactly the right moment to stop to play, not when somebody else tells :'Come on, you can't make it anymore. It's time to stop."

So I'm very happy that I could end on a high level, but also felt that as a player I kind of couldn't play as good anymore as I would have liked.

I could for sure play one or two more years, but it was also a great moment to have something completely new, not completely new, but a new job that became a huge passion afterwards.

It was a great transitional moment. And I was lucky. I was lucky. I'm very thankful for the people that gave me that opportunity at that moment and chose me.

Do you have a particular goal as a coach? Can be personal on a team or club level, or all of those.

Me personally. I think I'm living my dream. Now we’re going to the Olympics. I remember with my father in our cottage that we had on the lake.

We were watching the opening ceremony of the Olympic games of Los Angeles, I was eight years old. I told my father that one day I want to be in the Olympics. That was one of my dreams.

For us right now, the Olympics are so motivational that the practices and everything we do is just so easy, effortless in a way.

If you talk about goals, for me you talk about motivation. I think there's no stronger motivation, no stronger power in the world than the inner voice, than the inner decision.

If you decide that something is important to you, you want it so bad.

You don't have to talk about winning or something. It's the journey. It's difficult. And you have to have the players with character that everyday go, they go there and they work...but not everybody is doing that.:-)

People are different. In important games, most players are on fire, during less important games, they they care less.:-)

But for me personally of course I want to win, but it's not that, it’s not JUST that.

Maybe I gave him something for their life. The talks with the players are important.

Now, after our call, I will have a few players here just watching some tape and we'll talk about more random stuff.

Maybe we will win something, great. Of course, to win, it's great, but to repeat that:’ I want to win. I want to win.’ It's very boring. I'm trying to explain the deeper meaning of this job.

When you go to the gym, you see the guys coming in with fire in their eyes, willing to work. This is fantastic.

The future of volleyball, how will the game evolve according to your opinion?

In Russia for sure volleyball already became more technical, different kind of tips. Power tips just weren’t used in this league. Everybody being a setter and taking over the second touch with a high quality and efficient set is here today but will keep on evolving. I hope we don't touch the rules too much though.

I would love volleyball to be more popular. We have a great sport, maybe even the greatest team sport that exists. The game is never over til it’s over.

How good you are able to play, depends on what your teammate did before you. We can teach a lot of good values here also.

You can’t just pick up a volleyball and do something, there is a possibility that your touch/ contact is a mistake. :-) Focussing on the ‘team play’ aspect is maybe what can bring more popularity to volleyball.

In today's world we have less and less kids doing sports because of many things, mainly being ‘busy’ on the phone, which is the most passive way of spending your time.

As a sport we need to get them in ‘sport mode’, do more around activating kids to try to out our sport. If we continue like this, we will have less and less players.

About the game itself, for the popularity, less breaks are needed, it’s nothing ground breaking. If we are on tv and there are long breaks, people switch channels and possibly don’t come back.

I think from a technological standpoint, it has to be possible to have a quicker challenge system.

Serve and passing will stay very important even though we see bigger and harder spikes.

Like I said though, the team aspect is something to focus on, a lot. We don’t have a Michael Jordan, the sport is maybe even too complex for that.

Exactly. That is one of the questions of volleybrains, 'your strongest starting six', which in any sport and for sure in volleyball is an impossible question to answer(but we ask it anyways).

I like to call it the ‘Riley Salmon’ question, Rio 2008. A player that isn’t a high point scorer but is very much needed for the entire receiving and defensive system to work.

Being successful in volleyball is mostly not just about having the biggest stars in your team. There are players that just make everything better, they are in charge of the chemistry from a technical standpoint.

You have very few players that can be both.

Here on the Russian national team, we made Sergey Tetyukin the sportive director.

He was one of those greats, with him on the court it was easier for everybody else to play their best game.

Also for us he’s very important, a great guy, super humble, well a legend of the game really.

(Sergey will get inducted in the volleyball hall of fame this October)

What recent or game from the volleyball vaults did validate once more that volleyball is the greatest sport on the globe. For sure share your opinions about this matchup, what you took away from it.

I will mention a few.

When I really understood that I want to be a volleyball player, make it my profession, that was in 1990, the World Championship Final Italy-Cuba.

I know now that Italy beat Cuba for the first time there. I was doing all the scouting of that game. About Zorzi, about Despaigne, about everything. I was imitating their moves in practice.

The second game is the Olympic final of Atlanta 1996, Italy - Holland. An unbelievable game.

And then that entire period when Brazil was dominating the game, but for sure the final of the 2006 World Championship in Poland. I love to see the identity of the team and that identity, what Brazil had. They put the attack and the speed of execution completely on another level. At the moment they don't play so fast, but at that time it was something unbelievable.

And then of course I have to say when we, with Kemerovo. We had that series against Kazan where we won the Russian league.

That was something unbelievable, those moments when everything just goes!

For me personally, also to get to the world championships as the coach of Finland for the first time, I never made it as a player. But we made it as a team.

And most importantly I was coaching those players where I had played together with. Then playing against Brazil with 5,000 Finnish spectators in Poland.

And of course with the Russian national team winning the VNL 2019 and the Olympic qualification, all those moments and all the stories behind them.

Maybe I went all over the place, but all those games and moments mean something for our game and for me.

When preparing a new game (next weekend), how does your general approach look like and did you ever change your approach?

Our game prep is pretty straightforward. We of course scout, watch video and adapt our training a bit to our opponents those last days before the game.

What we never do is adapt our system to our opponents. You can’t develop a system to play opponent A or B, you play your own system with some smaller adaptations.

That sounds the same to some people, but it really isn’t. You don’t want to be in a game under stress and totally change your entire tactical concept, players can’t adapt that quickly in a high stress situation. That is just human nature.

For game prep to get the players more and more involved, we are trying out some stuff, letting players emulate moves according to the input that they received from the projected video. But no, it’s not something we religiously go by...it’s more a test to see how they react to this new input.

I want the video session to be rather short, have only one session with the entire team and focus on the setter of the opponent with their attacking options, that is the standard process.

For sure in those long tournaments it’s good to try to change things up with styles if video or game preparation. The difficult thing is that it needs to be genuine and not some foolish thing of course. It has to be genuine to the person that you are as a coach also.

I remember when I coached at Kemerovo that I took the gameplan, crushed it together and threw it to the garbage can...that was my way to hype up the players. But again, this works because I am me and I know my crowd.:-)

I don’t care to look foolish, as long as it is genuine. The question you’ll ask me is if we won or lost that game? I’ll have to check back. haha

(Don’t try this at home, folks :-))

In the end the focus on the opponent is just a very small part of our game. Of course you look at the rotations, that is our job, we want to have our libero receiving in the middle of the court on the opponent’s most dangerous serve etc etc.

But sometimes it doesn’t happen.

I choose to pick our rotations according to our strengths, not trying to compensate for everything that ‘can go wrong’ but full focus on our own game.

On a small sidenote.

In 2007, we got to the semifinals (of the European Championship) with Finland which was unbelievable. (We were even a few points from reaching the final.)

While we were playing the pouls and it depended on the win of Russia against Italy or something to know who our opponents would be, players were counting to know against who we would play.

So we had our team meeting, Berruto (Mauro Berruto, the Finnish head coach) had a calculator, which he took from the hotel reception. He took it, threw it to the wall, crushed it and said: WE DON'T COUNT. WE PLAY.

And told the team guide to go the pay that calculator at the reception. :-) It was fantastic.

Between the players, after that happened we didn't even speak about it.

We are preparing technically and tactically, but sometimes, we need something else. Jump off from your routines.

What is an unusual habit or an absurd thing that you love?

I love these questions. I’m really into putting value in the normal things, like tonight, I love to go for a walk in silence. After a long working day here in the camp, I enjoy sitting here on the bench outside.

I'm also doing some meditation exercises(with the Calm app) to be more aware.

I like to also just listen...just listen, that’s it. I feel like I need those moments.

During games when you have all these inputs, a million and one things are happening, I want to believe that these meditation exercises are a good protocol to insert into your life and you get a benefit from them during more hectic moments.

I also like to go to breakfast by myself on a game day. On those days I can't talk to anybody, that is not part of the team. I just can't. I'm so focused already on the game.

Sometimes I go to the gym for a short workout and people come up to me to talk, that is very hard for me. I need that time for myself.

And is it really something that you need?

I don’t know if it helps. :-) It’s my habit, that’s for sure.

You don’t want to change it?

The only reason for me to change it would be that for outsiders I might look to ‘into it’, but that’s not a good enough reason, right.:-)

Of course I am a bit flexible in that, because I don’t want to drive myself crazy, but a 180 degree change, no I won’t do that.

Another thing for me and that’s a delicate subject for a lot of coaches.

But I feel the best when I’m in a good physical shape. Two reasons for that are.

One, I feel more in control, you could say that I feel more on top of my own mental game. Two, I demand a lot of my players, if I ask them to take care of themselves then that doesn’t stop outside the walls of the training center and it’s not just for their career, being healthy and active doesn’t stop when you retire from being a pro athlete. I want to be an example there.

If you can make the strongest 'starting six' in the world, right now. What would your team look like? Why did you pick these players?

I want to answer, but I won’t name Russian players. I think that’s the right thing to do in my position.

Okay, so the strongest starting six, but no Russians.

As a setter: Bruno, how he leads the team, how he makes everyone better, he's the glue of every team where he goes.

As an opposite: that’s a difficult one, I will put a wildcard here and say Nimir, great physical potential. And didn’t win anything ‘BIG’ yet, so I guess he must be very hungry.

Spikers; Kubiak, he has just so many solutions, it’s fun to see and his character is one that few players/ people have...tenacious to the bone.

Leal, great player, wherever he goes he wins...that’s that.:-)

Middles, here it gets difficult…

I want a few beasts here. One is Lisinac, good spiking, good server, good blocker and the other one will be Simon.

You’ve got a lot of people wanting the ball there.

Yes, that doesn’t have to be a bad thing. For the middles I want to make a change, a great hybrid(good at everything) player is Solé, I would change Lisinac for Solé.

Do you have a book that you like a lot? Which lessons did you get out of it?

I’m actually reading Bernardo Rezende’s book at the moment. He was continuously finding ways to improve, always had winning on his mind and didn’t want his players to be in some kind of comfort zone.

Every year of national team preparation he made the morning sessions start an hour earlier and stuff like that. My good friend and assistant coach Claudio Rifelli had the honor to work with Bernardinho and he also says what everybody is saying, a more humble, kind person you won’t find in volleyball.

But for him when it’s gametime, IT IS WAR.

The book is great. Also the quote he made before the Olympic Final in Athens:’I don’t know if we will win, but I’m sure we did everything in our possibilities to be able to win’. That’s a big one. Not leaving any stone unturned.

I love to read the books of basketball coaches also. Phil Jackson for example. Right now I’m also rereading John Wooden. One of my biggest idols is Gregg Popovich of the San Antonio Spurs.

I loved Popovich speech, you can find it on YouTube.

In the end the message is the same, but they all have different angles to it, using different methods and ways. Very interesting.

They talk about the team, the synergy between the players and the player and the coaches...those interactions.

And about ‘the moment’, being in the moment. Because it’s easy to say that we need to be concentrated, but what does that actually mean, how do you get there, how do you stay there.

For myself and that is what you can also find in those books and it’s nothing extraordinary of course, but the biggest lessons come from losing.

How to cope with losing and being able to reflect on it. All of this is a mechanism that feeds your own intuition.

You have to have that intuition, you have to know your team.

A few times after a loss we went straight into the dressing room, and I made a crazy talk, well nothing crazy, but you know what I mean. But I can’t say that after that I got good results.

Maybe if something really bad happened, but to really find an example, probably it’s close to never a good idea to do that.

Sleep. Analyze it with a clear mind, then have a meeting with the team.

In this job, the intuition is a big part of it. What is needed in this moment? Maybe nothing is needed. Maybe with a few players, maybe some teamwork, maybe they should write down what they see that is going on and tell the team if they want to.

We are in this together, I have to lead and guide them, I don’t always have to be the one speaking. There are many different things to do.

But you got to know the team to decide what is the right thing.

There is a danger there for sure. You cannot experiment too much when things don’t work. Jumping from one experience to the next, while being on a losing streak. You don’t want to start to look like you don't know what you're doing.

Exactly, when that happens it’s over. That’s the worst thing. Again knowing your team, it’s cliché, but knowing yourself first of course also.

When you look like you don't know what you're doing you can forget about it.:-)

I was talking to a soccer coach a few weeks ago about what goes on inside the team. It's something that coaches tend to forget when they never played the game themselves. The power and the importance of the ‘dressing room’.

Having some key players there. That's the make or break.

Yes exactly, we talked about that before, those leaders, doesn’t even matter how important they are during the game. They keep the dressing room ‘healthy’. They guide your culture. That's everything.

What is one of the best or most worthwhile investments you’ve ever made?

For sure learning languages. When I started to play abroad, I went to play in France, the first thing I did was buy study books and invested evenings into learning French as fast as I could.

That is also what I promised my father that I would do that, so I had to.:-)

From French you’re set up to learn Italian faster. With knowing Italian you understand Spanish. Same with Polish and Russian...everywhere I went as a player I learned the languages as quick as I could.

You for sure never know what you will do in life, right now I’m coaching, maybe that will change later on. It’s about respecting the culture and your opportunities.

You learn one language and it gets easier and your motivation gets build to learn another one.

It for sure shows respect to your new club or the league that you are in that you can adapt quickly, or at least put in the effort.

It’s not always a positive investment of course, some languages you’ll never use again. When I signed in Japan, I also got the books, in our Roman alphabet of course, so that at least I could speak a few words.

But that is something else.:-)

Even though there, if I would have stayed another year, I think I could help myself out in a decent way.

It’s for sure not only about being able to speak, but also about having the practice to want to learn something new.

What advice would you give to a smart, driven young coach about to enter the  “professional coaching world”?

There are 2 main things that are important in that case and in a sense it wasn’t that long ago that I did exactly those things.

One is, go and meet people, talk to coaches, try to go and visit a high level coach, be there for 2 weeks, ask questions, keep your eyes open.

That is actually something that I’m missing a lot now, because the schedule is so full it’s difficult to squeeze that in. But at least we meet colleagues during the many competitions that we have, which is not exactly the same interaction, but still it’s very valuable.

The second thing is really sticking and committing to your goal, to your decision.

Being a volleyball coach is not choosing a simple life, on all levels the factor of luck plays a lot. That’s why it’s important that this is your full focus, there is no:’ I don’t have time, I won’t contact him, this is too difficult, I don't want to do this or that’.

A follow up to the last question. Maybe even more important, what advice should they ignore? What are bad recommendations that you have heared?

When I started to coach, I immediately became the head coach of Finland.  Many people said: ‘Don't do that. It's too risky. Don't do that. You can't coach the players that you played with.’

Listen to yourself, trust yourself. Outsiders giving their opinion is for sure a thing that I would ignore. Yes, it’s not easy to make a big career as a coach. It's very difficult. You have to be lucky. Maybe it will not work anyway.Who knows?

You have an idea about why that they said it, for sure, some of the people are trying to protect you without knowing that you have …bigger goals

‘Don't burn yourself immediately in your coaching career, because you're starting at the top.’

I was told, don't start from the top. You will burn yourself.

In hindsight it for sure wasn’t an easy task, but it was way easier than everyone made it seem.

So yes, more on that: listen to the people but not too much, because of course you will go and search for the 'information', you will weigh your own risk.

And the more passionate you are, the more 'information' you will find.

I remember having my first speech. In front of many high-level coaches in Finland in Icehockey, which is a world class sport in Finland.

I had to do a presentation of my coaching career. But at that time I was coaching for less than one year. We managed to go to the world championships, so that was the main reason I got there.

And they asked me, what is your coaching philosophy? When you started to coach, what was your coaching philosophy? What is it?

I said:’ I don't know. How can I know what my coaching philosophy is? If I didn't coach for one day, I have no idea what my philosophy is.’

Let's see. It will build day by day.

It’s about building your own idea’s. Not taking every advice. You will have to ignore a lot and I think ignoring negative talk will be the beginning.

Jumping back to the technical side of our game. Is there a rule change that you want to see turned back?

Actually sometimes I wonder about what would happen if we don’t have the challenge system anymore.

The human error and it's consequences, the drama, it had something. For sure now that we have it, let’s not make people lose medals or championships over it by not using it.:-)

The same thing goes for second touches, let’s be more forgiving there, don’t whistle too early, don’t interrupt the game.

I am for sure a heavy supporter of clean second touches, I feel like it’s an important part of our game that we shouldn’t throw away too fast.

Okay, I see what you mean, it goes back to the basics of our game. Being able to do a clean set is one of the basic ball touches in volleyball. Specialisation has brought opportunities for less technical and more physical players. That's right.

Small warming up games are implemented a lot to stimulate more of these random touches…

Yeah exactly.:-)

We play many games in the warm up of our practices. I know Vital (Heynen) started this...I like it, players get emotionally warmed up.

The brain needs to work and you get many touches in a different way that I think are useful in the game.

So we miss being able to handle those touches. Everybody needs to be able to at least handle the allowed touches.

If you could have a gigantic billboard anywhere with anything on it, what would it say and why?

Yeah, ‘Love what you do’. I’m not only speaking about volleyball or being a volleyball coach. Just in general. Being positive, I feel that positivity makes your life better. And most importantly it inspires people, it really does.

It’s such a simple thing, but loving what you do will greatly impact the people around you. It’s very silly, but it’s also very true.

Negativity sells, the newspapers are full of it. Try to get yourself as far away from negativity as possible. Don’t negotiate on choosing the positive or negative side...the choice is clear.

‘Hell yeah or no’ (Derek Sivers), talks about these choices also. The title wraps the book up pretty well. When looking at opportunities your way of thinking should be, (Hell yeah) I fully commit myself or (No) I don’t keep on contemplating on it, a ‘no’ is not a ‘maybe’, it’s a definite ‘no’.

Great. And I think in our job, for example, we are trying to find the set for the spiker.

I hear the setter and the spiker talking. 'Ah it could be a little bit like this, a little bit closer and higher. And, uh, yeah, we could go a little bit more here.'

Guys, what are you saying. It's good or it’s bad.

Because this talking nonsense, just gives us more doubts. So yeah, yes or no.

Zooming in on the technical part here. It's not about constant feedback on every ball. It's, ‘okay, today the setter setter will put more curve on the ball and that's what we do’.

And you don't have to continuously talk about it. This is the ball that we try. Some balls will be messed up, some balls will be too fast or will be too high, but we're trying to solve it.

That's the talk that I will have in two days with the team.

The biggest trap is that you try to have an answer on every ball.

The greatest answer is sometimes: 'I don't know'

Or you go into the Julio Velasco thing about...

I think these are the best videos that I've ever seen.

'The spikers they don't judge the set, they resolve it.'

(pressing the CC button on YouTube will get a decent English translation)

In the last five years, what new belief, behaviour, or habit has most improved your life?

I can say that curiosity has been something that I’m way more open to now than before.

How people make their decisions.

Becoming a coach made me appreciate these aspects which you don’t even consider as a player. I loved playing, but I really mean it when I say that I love coaching even more.

When you feel overwhelmed or unfocused, or have lost your focus temporarily, what do you do?

Like we talked about before. I let some time go over the more difficult decisions.

That’s my ‘go-to’ reaction. Maybe I find somebody that can help me.

But once I give something a bit of time I decide fast and don’t look back. That is something that I personally like and do.



