===== SESSION: https://volleybrains.com/daniele-santarelli/ =====

----- VIDEOS -----
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hC0n0EBjXaI
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jwkdCNHuYpM
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1JTZCyCo5X4
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yYV8ZJNz_2c
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=URFLTMPW5SQ
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5S2_fjppmsc
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mHZlcedrin0
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NlC3GmWzgOU
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7osyfzDMTR4
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FBtH7KuCToQ
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6A4y-1MWbPM

----- TEXTO -----
18. Daniele Santarelli:'If I knew what volleyball would look like 10 years from now, I would start to adapt already'

Since the 2017-2018 season Daniele Santarelli is the head coach of Italian powerhouse Imoco Conegliano. In this masterclass we talk about his journey and growth as a coach, what makes a great player, the evolution of our game and so much more.

Since Daniele became the head coach of Imoco Conegliano they have played 14 final games of the 15 various championships that they have taken part in.

Conegliano won an astounding 10 of those 14. Them being: 3 Italian Championships, 3 Italian Super Cups, 2 Italian Cups, 1 World Championship for clubs and 1 Champions League.

Making Daniele one of the most 'winningest' coaches in Italian volleyball...ever.

This was the 'easy', popular media introduction, but volleybrains goes deeper than that. We had a great talk with Daniele, went over our questions and more, Daniele delivered a lot of great advice.

While reading this article and watching the clips you will get to know Daniele's way of thinking, how his struggles as a player parlayed into being an advantage as a coach and how he sees his own growth process over the last few years.

Furthermore we talk about the 'ultimate player' characteristics, the future of volleyball, his favorite coaching resources and much much more.

Go ahead and enjoy the masterclass.

Enter Daniele...

Daniele, why and how many years ago did you decide to commit to being a professional volleyball coach? What pushed you towards that decision?

I tried to make a career as a high level player. I tried to get to the Italian Serie A and play at the highest level.

I never succeeded though, probably because I didn't have the skills both physical and especially mentally to play at those levels. (I overthought too much, which is never a good thing)

I always had the vocation of teaching (I was coaching smaller teams from when I was 18 years old) and at 27 years old I had the opportunity to get a coaching job in Pesaro following Monica De Gennaro, my wife.

I felt that there was no more opportunity to reach the highest levels as a player and this opportunity felt important enough to commit to.

Initially I worked for the second team of Pesaro, but I for sure felt that I was in the right place. Pesaro at that time had won 3 consecutive Italian Championships.

From day 1 it was obvious to everybody that my ambition was to be able to join the first team.

So yes, at that moment in my career I received that 'coaching spark' that made me say enough with playing volleyball, I will miss it but I have to try to do 'something' as a coach.

I realised that I didn't succeed as a player so I absolutely had to try to become a great coach.

Interesting, you mentioned that especially mentally as a player you carried a big burden, can you elaborate on that?

I thought a lot before, during and after the games about 'everything', well especially 'the during' and 'after' for me was dramatic, 'the before' not so much.

Especially after the matches, I came home and I tortured myself about everything that happened.

Remembering all the negative things and very few positive ones. I was trying to keep a clear head and focus on the positive aspects of the game but the negative aspects were inside of me all the time. This was very limiting to me.

I realised that I was 'living' every single mistake I had made.

It wasn't an issue I had with appearing a good player to 'other people', I only did it for and to myself.:-)

I don't think that the role of libero helped me in this because the role of the libero is very 'statistical', very limited...of course you're not attacking, there isn't another part of your game that you can use to lift yourself up.

Like a goalkeeper in soccer, you touch few balls but those must be perfect.

This is happening to me now, I am thinking a lot and many people acknowledge the fact that I live 24 hours a day with volleyball.

I was telling you before, with my first week off, yesterday I was talking to someone and he said: "You only talk about volleyball." I said yes, even on my days off I only talk about volleyball.

I see it with my wife who is completely the opposite of me, she doesn't dwell on errors or negative situations and that is why she has reached very high levels. Once something negative happens she puts it next to her and continuous to perform. All the things I suffered for have zero impact on her.

I, on the other hand, was carrying the wrong thing around with me. So this is a huge PLUS to have as a player and I'm happy for her.

Great answer, your analytical 'superpower' for sure is beneficial towards your club, team, your work...but probably you've still got some work to do.:-)

You are completely right. Many people have told me this, I should enjoy life more, take more free time and go out every now and then, I can't do it.

I have to do this, I have to study, work and think for the good of myself and the team.

Unfortunately I am made like this; I have this defect. I also happen not to rest too much and I sleep rather badly during the competitions.

I think that with a little more experience and going forward with the years I will acquire more self-confidence and I will be able to live the stress of these long complicated seasons with many competitions in a freer way.

Now I am doing it with less freedom and I am enjoying everything way too little.

Even this season, for example, which has been wonderful. I never really celebrated.

But at least I know that I have some work to do here.:-)

Probably having this video call in your 'free week' isn't helping you recovering from a long season cause again we are again talking about volleyball.:-)

No, no, it's a drug...it's perfectly fine like it is.:-)

What advice would you give yourself as a starting coach? An advice that is so clear and logic for you now, but that you had to develop over the years.

The things that I wanted to happen were not coming quickly enough to me but the path I decided to take (when I decided to start to coach at 18 years old) was the right path.

So I had to simply be more patient, sooner or later that day when I would have the opportunity to coach at a high level would come. So maybe just having more patience because the path that I was on was the right one.

I think I've tried to capture and took all the advice of the greatest teachers I've had. So I'm happy with that.

Now that I look back I tell myself that the sacrifices I made led to something good.

Do you have a particular goal as a coach?

There are two goals.

One is more personal. I simply want to continue to grow. I want to always have that curiosity that has always distinguished me.

Every year I want to try to learn something more.

Right now being the head coach of a high level team with a lot of competitions, a high work load, well it isn't as easy as it was before.

But I'm actively putting aside time to learn about our game and evolve as a coach.

I will keep having that curiosity, so there will come many more opportunities to learn.

Before it was reading books, following courses. Right now it's more looking at other National Teams, talking to other coaches etc.

The second one.

I think it is the goal of almost every coach in the world and it is the most obvious. Try to win the Olympics.

That would be the top.

(This next clip is the full length recording of the final of the 2021 Champions League, the 2 best club teams in the world competing against each other.)

The future of volleyball, how will the game evolve according to your opinion?

Volleyball, and for sure the Italian volleyball, of more than 20 years ago was considered a highly technical volleyball.

Where almost everyone knew how to do 'everything'.

The specialisation of roles made this disappear. I think that going forward we will go towards more and more specialisation.

The division of the libero into a receiving and a defending libero however, right there teams are going too far.

And I do not want to lose the concept of being able to be great at every 'main' skill, at least be able to execute every fundamental specific to your position.

However, with a volleyball like the one of today fast and spectacular with a lot of physicality it would be very nice to see many people who can do everything.

Nowadays seeing a middle player that has great difficulty in defense or that can't set a ball, that's a shame.

But I understand that volleyball is going towards that direction so a middle is now an attacker, a blocker and not much more.

An opposite must attack, if he defends well or if he doesn't defend, it's not a big problem...(but it should be a problem)

If I knew how volleyball would end up in ten years maybe I would try to anticipate it, adapt my team and myself already. :-)

We are trying with the women's team to get a little bit closer to men's volleyball, let's say in general playing a bit quicker.

We are succeeding in some respects not in others because obviously the physicality and the power of women's volleyball is very different from men's volleyball.

According to you, what rule change is necessary in the future? And why would you want to see this new rule implemented?

So look, I can think of two.

One is very complex. I've already thought about it and it would lead to chaos but in my opinion by finding the right implementation it could be spectacular also.

The libero should be able to set inside of the 3 meter line.

I understand why we can't right now. Of course the libero would become a seconder setter. But in my opinion the game could become really spectacular.

In some respects, however, I understand the current rules so everyone can organize their team well, it would be rather problematic to manage a real and a 'libero' setter.

But we would gain a lot of spectacle.

I am a lover obviously of volleyball in general and I think that in men's volleyball the service breaks the game up too often.

Volleyball is already hard for non-experts to watch. Of course I understand that you need to serve at a high level to disturb your opponents side-out. Otherwise, with the current spikers in men's volleyball it would become something 'automatic', that also isn't what I want to see.

But we've gotten to the point where there are games with 10 service errors in a set and 5-6 aces. To the point that a defensive action becomes something very, very rare.

A while back the rule that you couldn't land inside the court after serving was tested, I don't exactly remember when or where that was.

This in some respects in my opinion was a good ploy to try and limit the service potential.

In this way the opponent's side-out becomes even more important, at least more trainable or coachable because the serve is not so strong.

Don't misunderstand me, I am for sure enjoying a physical game of volleyball.

And also, for sure I am one of those coaches who has huge difficulties spotting where a hard ball dropped, 'in or out', so it would help me out also.:-)

So, you are Dr. Frankenstein and have the ability to put together the world's most performing volleyball player. Which characteristics would she have.

So I'll look at the characteristics of the best players I've had the honour to train in my very short career.

Obviously in addition to the technical aspect, the humane and 'how do you act in certain situations' aspect is a very important one.

A coach would always want a player who always pushes themselves at 100% of every training session, somebody that never limits themselves.

In 4 years she has never spared herself in a single workout, she never went below her own '90 percent' I have never seen her train and this makes her the champion that she is.

So the fact of never limiting yourself to always push to the maximum is an important characteristic.

Another one is this.

The fact of despite being a phenomenon as for example Paola Egonu in our team, the fact of being an integral part of the team and always be 100% available to your team.

I mention Paola Egonu because she is the 'emblem' of our team, the best player in the world at this moment.

I call her out by name here, because her humility is what makes her shine even more.

And then there are the purely technical and physical characteristics, you must obviously be a physically strong and technical player.

What interests me, however, is what is in here(points at his head) that lucidity and coolness that only the great champions have.

That characteristic that for sure I didn't have when I played. :-)

I would like my ideal player to have that.

That coolness or coldness.

(Next clip are a few of the 2020-2021 actions of Imoco Conegliano)

Best game you've ever seen. What recent or game from the volleyball vaults did validate once more that volleyball is the greatest sport on the globe.

So there are two moments that have stuck with me. The first one is one from a while back, it is from a volleyball that now isn't played anymore.

The Cuban female national team in the days that they were playing with 2 setters, with Aguero, Francia and the players of that generation...I don't try to name of all them, I don't want to forget somebody, I don't want to be disrespectful, they all were phenomenal.

This Cuba played an incredible volleyball and it hurts my heart to think that Cuba has not been able to do anything like that afterwards despite them still churning out important players both at the women's level but especially at the men's level.

In the recent past just think how many Cuban players he have playing around the world and who have played in Italy over the years.

So that Cuba made me fall in love with volleyball. I was very young so my memory is a bit faded, but I'm sure I would be impressed upon rewatching it.

The second one was more recent and I remember it very well.

It was a match of the World Cup where the United States women's national team played against Japan. Italy in that year won the World Cup because Japan managed to win against the United States.

It is obvious that I was directly interested to follow because I was following Monica.

I remember that Japan being clearly inferior to the United States but managed to totally annihilate the United States playing an incredible game in defense.

This thing has been a model and an inspiration to me since then. I have always carried it with me. Every now and then I pull it out and use it.:-)

From when I was coaching youth volleyball because I was coaching at that level in those years and I was always telling my players (who were rather small). 'We are Japan and we play against the United States.'

To now coaching Conegliano and every now and then I tell my players: 'let's do the Japan of the situation', I made this my inspiration...

To see a small technically strong team that never gives up on every single ball win against Goliath.

When preparing a new game (next weekend), how does your general approach look like?

If your typical week is from Sunday to Sunday the preparation of the match is much simpler and longer than when you play every three days. Playing Sunday, Wednesday, Sunday and Wednesday, the preparation of the match will be summarised and very detailed. Just giving basic information with small details that can make a difference...

That shorter preparation is the thing that I do most often because in Conegliano we have the good fortune to play many competitions.

This year with COVID we  played a much longer season and despite the many competitions we had many weeks where we could prepare a bit longer and more detailed.

I liked this a lot because we as coaches have the opportunity to 'lose' more time talking about the opposing team, to focus on our own team the first part of the week and then focus on the opponent in much more detail at the end of the week.

There have of course been games where I've done preparations in a very, very in-depth way, like the champions final, the scudetto final.

So if we have the opportunity to do it in a more stretched out way we use it, but that is only possible in these extreme situations with a lot of time.

What is an unusual habit or an absurd thing that you love?

I don't have a real routine...I think.

Ok, before I get to the gym when we have gameday I live those moments in the same way.

I listen to music and drink an Italian coffee.

When I get to the gym I want to be alone, I don't want anyone to talk to me before I make the speech to the team.

I don't want anyone to disturb me for that half hour, three quarters of an hour.

By now my staff know it and they make a loop around me.:-)

Why? Well...when I talk to the girls in the dressing room for those couple of minutes before going out to play, I want to be fully concentrated.

That preparation time is something that I need.

How has a failure, or apparent failure, set you up for later success? Do you have a “favorite failure” of yours?

We talked about this earlier, every defeat remains a very bad experience, it's the same story over and over again.

The one that hurt me the most was without a doubt the Champions League loss against Novara two years ago, where we were the favourites to become the champion of Europe.

Beforehand I knew that a 'single game' would have many hidden pitfalls and anything could happen. We also had some physical problems, but let's not talk about that.

When we played against Vakif (Vakifbank) this year, I knew it would end up the same way.

I've heard a lot of rumors, people trying to put a stick between the wheel. People tried to make us favorites just to put more pressure on us.

I tried not to make the same mistake we made two years earlier with Novara. I remained more clearer in my mind.

I 'lived' the Champions League final much better, but also the day before and the night before was much better.

I was much more serene and even being down 4-0 in the tie break I was very serene. So I must say that mistakes always teach us something.

So sometimes something positive comes out of failures. Winning the Champions League this season was a great achievement.

I see you're slowly trying to enjoy your wins, there is still a lot of time to improve on that.:-)

If you can make the strongest 'starting six' in the world, right now. What would your team look like? Why did you choose these players?

A very difficult question.

I think this is the classic answer, that is that I have the strongest players in my own team.

Actually I think that many players that I had the luck to coach are easily among the strongest players in the world.

I will not mention all of them, I will tell you who I have strongly admired, maybe of other national teams that I would have wanted to coach.

I would have liked to train Aguero, I would have liked to train Sokolova, an extraordinary player, an atypical Russian player, she knew how to do it all.

Maja Poljak, the Croatian middle in my opinion was among the best in the world ever.

I don't know what to tell you, there are a lot of great players. I'm thinking about the Brazilian women and the American women of the past.

For now I have to say that maybe these 3 are among the characters that I would absolutely have the desire to coach.

Do you have a book that you like a lot? Which lessons did you get out of it?

Ok, so I only read 'sports books'. Just so I never get out of that 'circle'. :-)

I love books from volleyball, to soccer, to tennis, to cycling, any sports book fascinates me.

That can be a biography, a story of an event, or about the diet from a player like Federer for example. I read a lot.

I have to say that I started like almost everyone else with 'Open' by Agassi. It is a wonderful and incredible story, behind the champion there was that suffering by the player in all its facets and this is a thing that fascinates me.

How he as a player approached this sport but also how much at the same time he has hated it for all that the sport has given him and taken away from him.

This book should make everyone enter in their own reflective state.

'Why the heck I reacted in this way in that situation'.

His story goes way deeper of course, his father imposed the sport on him, he was the best of the best with many demons...a great story and a wonderful book.

Then I like books by coaches.

The first one is the book of Montali. "Scoiattoli e tacchini. Come vincere nelle organizzazioni con il gioco di squadra"

Obviously him being a famous volleyball coach this book is near to me, it tells the story about him going through the ranks and becoming a top coach. And of course knowing other characters in the book makes the story very personable.

To name others, well there are many more, but I like Dan Peterson's books  and Guardiola's book a lot. Also the one of Ancelotti isn't bad.

Let's say the one by Dan Peterson is my favorite one, it would be too easy being an Italian to talk about soccer.:-)

Dan Peterson because, in my opinion how this man tells his stories, nobody does it in that way.

One of the most touching moments of my 3rd degree coaching level course was the moment when Dan Peterson came over and told his stories about his own good luck to have been able to coach and him talking about his players and their characters.

He really describes the human aspect very well. Us coaches tend to often stop at or lose ourselves in the technical aspect of the game.

Like I mentioned before Paola Egonu is a wonderful player, Dan Peterson's book made me think even more about the human aspect. These things I'm picking up left and right make me admire my players even more.

What is one of the best or most worthwhile investments you’ve ever made?

The most important investment I made was when I chose to go and work with Davide Mazzanti.

In that year I had the opportunity to go and be the assistant coach in Piacenza in A1 earning more money than I would have earned by going to be the third coach of Davide.

I don't know why but I was convinced that choosing to work with Davide would have been the best choice even though from an economical point of view..well I had no money, it was not the best one.

Why go and be a third coach for less money when you have the opportunity to make more money and be a '2nd coach'?

What advice would you give to a smart, driven young coach about to enter the  “professional coaching world”?

You must not do it for money, you must not do it in a hurry to get there, but you must do it with a lot of patience, trying to learn from the best coaches in the world and trying to study and work as hard as possible with a lot of humility.

This is a job that, like many others, is best done with passion, with a lot of desire to go to the gym and work as much as possible.

So I believe that humility, work, sacrifice and patience are the main 'weapons' to try to get to a high level and above all without ever feeling arrived but always trying to learn something.

Because sport in general changes every period, every generation changes because of the change of rules and the change in physicality, the change of many things means that volleyball at this moment is totally different from that of ten years ago.

This all means that you can not stop learning or studying...ever.

'Wouldn't it be better to live a quieter life at home, especially without the uncertainty of this job?', that is another question a lot of coaches ask themselves.

I think the advice I can give is simply to listen to what you want to do.

I strongly wanted this life, I felt I wasn't happy doing other types of work. I studied to be a physical education teacher. I felt, however, that it wasn't what I liked and that it didn't make me feel fulfilled, so I took big risks and led a more difficult life.

I'm away from the family at Christmas, New Year, Easter when others are together more often than not you're not there.

But if that's what you really want to do the best advice is to listen to your heart because that's what it is that makes you happy you simply have to continue on this path here.

Do you feel that you have missed something, I don't for example I don't feel that I have...

No, because the desire to do 'this other thing' was clearly superior, there is always a moment where we complain but this happens to everyone.

There is that moment when I would like to be together with my family at Christmas time.

If you could have a gigantic billboard anywhere with anything on it — metaphorically speaking, getting a message out to every athlete or coach on the globe — what would it say and why?

This may seem presumptuous but first I'll tell you the sentence then I'll explain why.

There is a sentence that was said by an Italian soccer president who died recently, and he said that 'winning is not important, it is the only thing that counts.'

I believe that whoever does sport does it because he wants to try to arrive first every time. You have to try in every way to arrive first, whether it is at youth level, lower national levels, national team levels.

I think I used to do that when I was playing with my friends on the playground.

Any game we played and I lost, well it bothered me so much that I would almost try to cheat so I wouldn't lose.:-)

When I was young it might have been a negative thing in the eyes of my friends. Now people around me tell me this was the engine that pushed you to get to a higher level.

I think to everyone that plays sports that the only thing that matters is to win.

I understand that it is against the 'Olympic idea'. But winning should be the driving force for every athlete, trying to aspire to be first every time.

So again, 'winning is not important, it is the only thing that counts', it could sound presumptuous, but it belongs to me because I believe that it should 'belong' to every athlete in the world.

In the last five years, what new belief, behaviour, or habit has most improved your life?

I wasn't a 'first coach' five years ago...so let's skip this one.:-)

When you feel overwhelmed or unfocused, or have lost your focus temporarily, what do you do?

I study. :-)

I try to understand why something didn't go right, I try to understand where the mistake is.

After a moment of nervousness and anger there will be a moment of lucidity.

In fast most of the time you shouldn't talk to the team after a loss because you need that moment of reflection.

Go back home and think about what went wrong.

After that, for me, talking it out is the basis of everything.

I believe a lot in dialogue with the players first of all and then with all the staff, I always do it that way and I think that if you want to try to understand where the mistake was there is no other way but to confront yourself and the people on your side.

After your research, which is obligatory in this job, I believe that you simply have to talk, and talking helps me a lot.

When I feel bad I go back to the gym and talk and everything goes away.

If I stay at home I feel bad and I'm eager to go back to the gym.

A question that we aren't able to ask a lot. As your married to an expert high level volleyball player(Monica De Gennaro), what did this teach you about the game. Did this benefit you in your coaching career?

Monica is completely my exact opposite. For me having her by my side helped me grow in an incredible manner.

She knows how to handle things in a more positive way than I do, I'm more negative, more reflective.

For me she is an important outlet because she knows how to listen to me.

Like I said before I need the people of the team around me to help us find solutions, she is one of them. She wants the good of our team because she is a player. I'm her husband and the coach.

So she's just trying to make sure everything works out for the best.

It helps me a lot, it makes me think about certain things, it makes me be less impulsive, it makes me be calmer and more thoughtful in my reactions.

In four years I am totally different person and probably this is due to some experience.

The fact of having experienced all these matches.

But certainly also the fact of having her by my side.

That helped me to understand that certain attitudes were wrong in the eyes of the girls because they were negative which is never good.

That's a wrap.

Thanks a lot for the availability, Daniele.

P.S.: The Italian women's national team with 4 players of Imoco Conegliano taking part have won the European championship against the reigning champ of Serbia.

A few highlights right here.



