===== SESSION: https://volleybrains.com/russ-rose/ =====

----- VIDEOS -----
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yOT5PJXR30Y
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LzG_1sMtLh4
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sLeBuDWs6nU
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yD9PX_N8-vo
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Bi1XaBJpqRc
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pbmX-ybch88
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VRH2f7ULMBo
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=P1QW4-vkCRM
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ytnezMgBJTc

----- TEXTO -----
19. Russ Rose:'You can't get too high when it's good and you can't get too low when it's not good.'

Normally our intro's are the highlights from a coaches' wikipedia page. But what do you pick with a Russ Rose interview: coached 44 All Americans, 40+ years of head coaching, won 7 national championships? We had the pleasure to have a long call with coach Rose. Hope you will enjoy the interview.

In our call we went all over the place. I should've been a better 'interviewer', but it is fine to loosen the reigns and go with it with coach Rose and just... talk volleyball.

So we will hop around a lot and that is fine, there is a lot of content here.

(5999 words and 7 clips of video edited answers for a total of 25min - the video quality is a bit lower due to bandwidth issues, but the audio is perfect)

A great intro to the interview(so our European readers get a grip on coach Rose's legacy) is this clip that was made a few years ago.

Enter coach Rose.

Coach, tell me more about how you want to coach your team?

I love the men's game and the men's game to me is the highest level of the game being played.

It's the purist game to me as it maintains a more aggressive emphasis on serving and attacking. I don't care that the length of the rally is short, it's demonstrating the game at its highest level.

When we had our best teams at Penn State... I don't exactly recall which stretch of time that was, but I know we won four championships in a row and had a wonderful run.

More to the point I coached that team like a men's team. We trained like a men's team. Systematically I wanted to do things more like a men's team.

I remember a number of years ago, we had come back from our team’s tour in Brazil, when the Brazilian men's team was recognized as one of the top in the world.  Bernardino was still coaching the men's team and he allowed us to watch a practice.

Some of the drills that we took from that practice, I brought back and implemented with our women’s. They were different than what people would assume one should be doing with a college women's team.

We adapted a drill where our attackers were hitting balls with no block with good pace at the libero to initiate the drill. Not just to 'develop' range in the defensive player, but just to say, this is how we're starting the drill.

We know that in a lot of sequences in the women's game, coaches don't put that much pressure to get the ball over the net, throwing the ball to start the drill is in some cases way more realistic. That is just one small example.

In the end it boils down to having high quality players of course, if you don't have the quality of players to do things, you just can't do some things.  My college coach Jim Coleman use to say to not try to do something tactically that you can’t do technically.

Circling back to the men's game, I watch a great deal of men's volleyball and I mainly watch it to still the hunger I have for our game, I miss some of the parts of the men's game in our women's game, it reminds me of different things that I could implement when I coached men and reflects on the talent base that I have in the gym at the present time.

From our talk before the interview and seeing your passion for the game, is there something that stood out to you about your international experiences?

Before the 2008 Beijing Olympic games I was consulting with our men's National team. We participated in a six nation tour in Italy with three matches a day.  The teams were Italy, Russia, Brazil, China, USA and I don’t recall the final team.

I was basically recording all of the serves by the players and recorded the velocity and location of the service area as well as where the ball was served. The fact that I was recording all the matches I was present for all of the matches from start to finish.

What stood out to me was that Brazil differed from the other teams during introductions in that every night before they played, when they were introduced....to just see the passion of the players, hugging and kissing each other on the cheek. That was so unbelievable, that intangible. That’s something that's really hard to replicate.

But that is the beauty of our game, it's such an international game, there are all these influences, things to learn, things to observe.  We as coaches all want our players to get along but it is near impossible when it is forced.

The last few months we saw a lot of International competitions all with a high quality live stream, also one of the first times we could really check out the time outs...

Yes, the time-outs are interesting.

When coaches talk about training a team and developing a team, I always say: Hey, you don't know how your team is going to play because you can't replicate the stress of an event. You can't replicate pressure. You can't replicate certain things.

And you also can't replicate the emotion and passion of people that really care for each other, that Brazilian cultural thing.

What they're saying in these minimal time outs. Is it substantial? Is it meaningful? Or are they just giving the players a breather, a chance to relax or are they things saying specific technical/tactical things. Is it positive? Is it negative? Is it neutral? Is it fluffy?

What I picked up was that all coaches are different and their timeouts reflected that in a short time frame.

Now I understand that as a coach how you talk and think about the sport is specific. As a player, you're going to respond better to a coach who talks to you in a similar way.

I was a Phys Ed teacher and wasn’t that good of a player in college, I would respond to a coach better who says to me: Hey, you're playing shitty, get in the game and focus on what you need to focus on and stop staring at the chicks in the crowd.

So I wouldn’t need somebody to talk to me about my angle of approach.  Coaches are going to be in different camps as well, how they prepare and put things together.

And that's why for me listening and watching is really interesting because it's so different everywhere. It's very interesting watching these different countries.  I think it is even funnier that some coaches had translators and who knows what was lost in the translation.

I'm  a student of the game making up for the fact that I was a weaker player of the game. :-)

Like the different national teams have their cultural differences, the same goes for how it is in different pro leagues and even specific pro teams, it's a constant adaptation, that is what our job is really about-trying to get the group of individuals to play as one.

I'm sure you have some great stories around your international experiences also. What is one that stood out to you.

Back in the day, I coached professional men's volleyball in Puerto Rico, I'm talking about 45 years ago now when I was 22.

I went to Puerto Rico because it was wintertime in Chicago. And it was sunny in Puerto Rico. And I had never been there. :-)

I didn't speak a word of Spanish and it was a wonderful experience.

Well, I mean, to me it was great. It was coaching.

I remember matches where people were throwing mangoes onto the court and yelling: 'Gringo, go home'. And me saying in a timeout, which one of you guys is named 'gringo'.

It's a ridiculous story, but it's one that will always be part of who I am.

That is in essence how I look at coaching.

If you needed to describe your style of coaching, with the vast experience that you have about developing your team, how would that sound like?

I always say to them, listen, you have a very small window of time in which you try and be good while you're here. Everything matters and everyday matters.

But it's not life and death.

And if you have issues that prevent you from being focused on that day, I just need to know ahead of time, because otherwise my assumption is going to be that you're going to come in and give a hundred percent and be ready to go.

If we were going to put coaches in different boxes, you, who is more than qualified to be a coach, it sounds like you would be a technical coach.

I'm an attitude coach.

And if somebody was going to ask a technical question that I thought could go either way. I'd say, that's a good question. Matias is going to answer it for you.

If somebody would ask me a certain question about performance, I just say: Yeah, they need to play harder. My answer is: If you don't go for the ball, you're out of the drill, that's the answer.

And how do we do that? That's how we do it.

If you don't go for the ball, somebody comes over and pats you on the butt and you're out of the drill. No one yells, no one does anything.

But if you're out of the drill, you're not getting better. You're not in the rotation. You’re  a shagger or you're kind of just standing around.

I coach women and I'm a sarcastic person. People always say sarcasm is a bad thing. And I'm like, well, that's unfortunate because I have been sarcastic for a long time and my attitude is that... losing sucks too.

What's worse. I think losing's worse than being around someone who is  sarcastic, to me, it's like: Hey, deal with it. Don't worry about what's being said.

I always say: Hey, listen, I don't know what you're thinking because, I don't. And in return, I'll never make a statement where I say you don't care because I don't know if you care.

Everybody cares. Some people care a lot. Some people just don't know how to demonstrate that they care when they play.

But this is what it looks like to me and the other team. And if the other team thinks that you don't look like you're competitive, or it doesn't look like you're a good teammate, or it doesn't look like you can handle making an error...well, that feeds the momentum to the other team, whether it's real or not.

The development takes place from my standpoint, through that sort of communication.

I mean, we can show a video about how people do it right. That's the beauty of this thing (looks at 2nd screen) here is, you know, you can watch the TV, record stuff and say, man, these guys are unbelievable.

And some of the women are unbelievable, but it doesn't transfer.

But when they see themselves, yeah, there it is. You know, a picture is worth a hundred words, but videos worth a million words.

You embody a simple but very important coaching trait, which is in all instances being who you really are and coaching it that same way. Playing somebody you're not as a coach sooner or later gets debunked.

I coached men and I've coached women for many more years. I coached them similar. And I know there's always examples where I know, I shouldn't say what I say. I know that, but I do it anyway, just because I am who I am.

But I also know there are some players that I hardly ever talked to because they can't handle any feedback. If it was me or anybody else coaching them, probably it wouldn't matter that much.

Good, bad or neutral. They're just unable to handle anything. They're in their own world and in many cases in their own way. So any interaction confuses them.

Knowing what you know and knowing what you don't know and reacting correctly to the both of them isn't something easy at any age. For sure not at a young age.

Probably it's foundational to first try to figure out what kind of player or coach you are and adapting from there...

I'll give a interesting story. About being open to learn and to adapt.

I was with Karch consulting in Montreux on his first trip as the Head Coach, Hugh was the coach of the women's team, but he didn't go on the trip.

Karch was going to be heading the team on that trip. The first time ever for him in the role of the head coach, other than when he coached his sons on their high school boys teams.

And here's a guy who was clearly one of the best players in the world and one of the greatest competitors, unbelievable at both of those two things.

And yet he really had limited experience other than being so good at what he did and having no real, in my mind, experience or awareness of some of the other things that coaches pick up during their career.

While he was talking to the team at one meeting and I'm standing in the back,   Remember I'm along as a consultant slash visitor slash guest, I'm along for the ride because people told me that Montreux is the best place to ever go. :-) And I wanted to go and it was unbelievable as you probably know.

At one point I say to him, as a former phys ed teacher, I have to say that you shouldn’t stand in the middle of the group and talk because the people behind you can't hear you and he was like: That's good.

Things that we all experience and he needed to process them as he went along, but he is very bright and transferring from player to coach is a complicated one.

Probably more important I told him: Karch, all of these players have played professionally with members of all of these teams participating in the event. Why not take 10 minutes and let our players make a small personal scouting report on how they see their opponents.

It was like, no one had ever requested the players to share their perceptions of former teammates from their foreign contacts. The scouting reports they offered was very inciteful to me, the technology that exists right now is unbelievable. We also had that back then of course.

Technology is dictating so much but winning and losing has some other components that one can't tally, but teammates can know these things, things which when the going gets tough start to get really important.

And then the last thing I mentioned was that, you can talk to them about technique, because you were one of the best players in the world.

Not because you were a woman's player but because you were one of the best players in the world.

The learning thing. That is what differentiates us.

I have had many players on the national team at different times. Even now, I ask them how  it is going, they speak very highly of both Karch and Luka.

I am thrilled for the USA women winning a gold medal for all the players and coaches that have been in the trenches of supporting USA volleyball.  The fact that we had 2 players on the team that had played at Penn State made it even sweeter.

In prepping our call I've seen you are and rightfully so pretty outspoken about recruiting and some of the less positive developments. What should recruiting look like to you.

I always say this to our coaches and I've always felt the same way. To me recruiting is very simple.

When I was a 17 year old boy, I didn't lie to girls. I'm not going to lie to girls as a 60 plus year old man. So I, when I recruit somebody, I tell them the truth about the program.

This is what we're interested in, in you as a person and as a player. This is what the program is about, this is what the expectations would be for you as a player.

And I never tell somebody, you're going to play. I always say, I can guarantee you, you're going to get better. I can guarantee you, you're going to be mad at me at some point in time, because you're going to say I'm so stubborn and he doesn't listen.

Or you know, he takes me out when I make a mistake. And if she makes the same mistake, he doesn't take her out.

And I always say: Hey, listen, if you come up with new material, I'll listen. But until then, this is how it is. You're going to have the opportunity to dictate your development and playing time.

You're a student athlete, be a good student, be a good athlete. I want to help you accomplish those things. I'm here to help you do those things. I'm not here to be your best buddy.

I'm here to help you with those things.

The 'best game' question is the next one on my list. This one brings me back to the first videocall I did for volleybrains. John Cook told me his and your most favorite game are probably the same. The 2008 final four game against Nebraska.

That was certainly one of the great games for sure, for several reasons.

We had gone the whole season and had never lost a game, a set. We had not lost a set all year, so I don't know how many matches that were, probably we had played 80 games till that point.

So we had never lost a game and Nebraska was hosting, they had to beat Washington who was very good at Washington so they earned the right to be there.

That match was a couple of things.

One, it was one of the few times that with that group, I moved my starting line up to adjust to an opponent. Against everybody else it didn't make a difference how we started because we were probably hitting .370 or so as a team, everybody was incredibly physical. Everybody was touching well over 10 feet. Even our setter Alisha Glass was probably 10'4'', 10'5'', she later went on to set for USA in the Olympics.

The only thing I thought that Nebraska could do with their very talented team do that others couldn't was the impact of Jordan Larson's jump spin serve. I felt that with those 15.000 people supporting Nebraska and in a situation that we would be under pressure that that serve could alter the outcome.

So I only changed our rotation to make sure our libero was in the right position to defend in the middle on that rotation. What I remember is sitting there and that crowd was so loud that the water that was next to me was vibrating. The decibel level was so high.

So yeah, it was a great match and we lost two games and we were losing in the last game. And Nic Fawcett, who also played on the national team for a number of years was serving and she had a great jump spin serve, but was serving a floater to neutralize things and reduce the risk for error, and generated X number of points for us.

And we came back and won that match and advanced to the finals and beat Stanford in the finals.

I think the other match that I would think about was a match where at the beginning when the bracket was pointed out, I identified a match-up where I said that the winner of that match would go and win the championship.

That was our match at the Kentucky regional between us and Stanford. That was a great match as well. I think it was a five game match, we went on to win that match and then won the national championship a week later.

We also had a finals game against Texas, Destinee Hooker's team, where we lost the first two games to go on and win it, that was great also.

But, it's easy to pick all the games where you won, but certainly the environment there in Nebraska, there was never a match that had that environment. That's for sure.

What advice would you give to 20-30 year old Russ Rose, something you know now and that you wish that you knew back then.

The fact that I'm still watching volleyball now would mean that I haven't figured it all out. I think I've always been a good watcher and a good listener and not an eager talker. I talk when I must talk, but otherwise I'm not interested.

I don't go out to meet new people and meet new friends. I think for some people that sounds like a great activity. For me, I like to bring a book and a cigar and go sit in the sun. :-)

So what have I learned?

You have to realise that the most important factor in success in coaching is the players, not the coach.

If you have good players, you have a chance. If you don't have good players, you have no chance, but you still have an opportunity to make an impact. And you still have an opportunity to make the unit better, but it may not be enough to make your career advance.

It may not be enough to be significant in the eyes of the person evaluating. So you have to just recognise it's always about the player. Now I have situations where the players think I'm picking on them or something or that I don't take their side and I always have a real simple answer.

I'll always be available to help a player, but unfortunately, sometimes they must go because it's addition by subtraction. And I'll say, I'm going to miss you, but I'd like to help you.

So what do I know now is that I might've been too loyal as a coach to not take some players out when I should have taken them out when they were playing poorly in really big matches because I looked at their body of work and said, they're hitting .350 for the year.

Instead of saying they're hitting zero in the match for the national championship. I got to get them out of there. If you're hitting zero in the national championship match, I think you deserve a nice glass of cold water at the end of the bench. And we'll give somebody else an opportunity to help the team.

The things that I would probably do different is I probably made some recruiting decisions where I felt I should recruit somebody to fill in the roster, but I should have just bitten the bullet, not done it and taken the hit for a year or two.

Instead of trying to balance the team and help the seniors by bringing somebody in to help them have a better junior or senior year where I should have just said: Hey, if you can't get a good player, no player is better than the wrong player. Or no player is better than a player that is not going to develop or no player is better than a player that's not a Penn State player.

Probably what happened is that, I got lazy in recruiting where I had some players that came to Penn State because we were successful not because they were willing to do the things they needed to do to be successful, which is part of what they have to do.

You know, they must work hard. Our situation is they have to work really hard. I want to win within the rules of the game. And if you're not mentally tough, then this might not be a great place for you.

Yes, I want to zoom in on being 'tough' as an athlete...

I have some players that are tough, not all the players that I coach are really tough. And I'm sure you played with some male players that were very good, but they weren't really tough.

So that doesn't mean that being tough is only a male characteristic, but being tough is a valuable characteristic in sports. And certainly, when one's training a team, we have to do drills and things to identify who the players are, who are tough.

I run practices where I do lots of things where the players must compete against each other, where I set it up, that they're competing against each other.

I don't antagonize the players. The drills are designed to be competitive and to get the best out of them.

So to me, it's competition, winning and losing. And if somebody is having a technique problem, we take them out and I have my assistant go on the other court and break it down and make them feel good and polish it up.

Very important that you defined the toughness, it's a concept that the players have to own, it breathes competitiveness.

We established that maximizing the talent is what the main goal of any coach should be...

So the question is for me, and I tell this to coaches all the time. The first question you have to ask is: What's the level of play I'm coaching at.

So if you're coaching at a high school team somewhere in the United States or you're coaching a club team somewhere in Europe or the national team of the number one country in the world.

Hey, those are three totally different levels of play and probably totally different levels of financial support and totally different levels of talent in your gymnasium.

So therefore your plans are not all going to be similar, but once you identify where you are now, you say, okay what's my blueprint or my vision, what do I want to achieve?

How much time do you have if you're a pro coach? And you're telling me, pro coaches have one year contracts or two year contracts, or you're at the whim of the owner coming in and saying: Hey, I don't like the direction you're gone. I'm going to bring in a friend of mine.

I wouldn't want to coach in that world.

Because you know somebody has got to be in charge and it should be the coach.

And it takes time to develop a culture. And part of developing a culture is being in the gym, working the players, trying to get them to understand your nomenclature, your expectations for practice, your technique, things that you think are important.

That's also what I tell our players, coaching styles do differ, and you have to be able to adapt to that.

You may do things one way when you played club, another way when you came to college, another if you go to the national team, another if you go play professionally.

And the key is whatever, the next person who's coaching you says, the answer is 'okay'. So go out there and try and do it that way.

But understand that when the game starts, if you revert back to your own way and do it correctly and successfully, there's a likelihood whoever's coaching is going to overlook the fact that maybe it wasn't perfect for them, if the results were perfect that is all that matter.

As a player you need to have confidence in yourself, and you need to understand how all this works.

Our question about the current volleyball rules, is there something you would want to see changed, changes that would improve the game?

I'm fine with rally score. I like traditional scoring better. But I get it. Rally score is here to stay. It's not going anywhere.

I don't like the net serve. For me. We don't use it in practice.  And I just always look at it like: Hey, it's not going to hit the net and go left or right. It's not a skill thing that you can control, it's luck.

But I think the next thing that may change eventually is backrow people having to land behind the three meter line, that might probably be the only thing that can neutralize the game.

I think if they think the offense is taking over the game too much, that's the only way to do something about that.

They can't tell everybody to change the dimensions of their courts, change the lines and things like that.

Continuing on the rally score, in my opinion the only reason we went to rally score was because men's volleyball was missing 25 serves a match and the score was still 3 to 3. So that was the only reason we went to rally score.

I thought they did it for the men and it penalized the women's game, but now everybody's into it.

About the backrow hitters, well we don't have a lot of good backrow attackers, but the men now are getting to the point where they can almost wipe it out of the back row.

That's unbelievable.

In general, I think the game is great the way it is. I don't know what else they can really do with it.

They're loose on ball handling as is, they don't call anything. I think that's always been one of my bugaboos about the game.

They should let the younger kids mangle it so that they develop a love for volleyball. And then when they get older, they have to learn to have good technique.

On the highest level, I watched a match a couple of days ago and there was a ball handling call and people went nuts.:-)

We didn't know each other before, but for me you looked like a kind of coach that would tell me look, the rules are what they are and let's play inside of these rules.

Yeah. These are the rules, now let's play the game.

My position was always: Hey, if the other team is screening, you go dry your hands by the first official and say: Hey, they're screening in row three. And if the referee doesn't do anything, then we know that we should screen. :-)

No, we don't want to argue just play the game.

I used to be a national referee. So, for me it was one of the advantages when I was in college...

I went to college and I never saw volleyball before, I took a volleyball class from Jim Coleman, who was the 68 Olympic coach.

- For the old timers. He was the old, bald headed guy that was always on the bench with USA volleyball for a long time.-

That was kind of my introduction. I took a volleyball 1 class and then volleyball 2 class and took a Coaching Volleyball class from Terry Liskevych, who coached three Olympics for the women and also coached a bunch of players that coached in the United States collegiately.

So for me, I officiated and was a national referee and then when my school joined the BIG 10. I stopped officiating because it didn't feel ethically correct... it wasn't right to me to ever have the opportunity to even ask a girl to call heads and tails as a junior player. As that would be perceived that I was talking to junior players.

I retired from officiating 30 years ago.

I know the rules and I always read the rule book and keep myself up to date with the rules, because I think it's a really important thing for coaches to know the roles.

I think players play.

Coaches really need to know the rules.

What has been the best or the most interesting team you've coached?

Even when people will ask me to do the best players, I've coached, I never do that nor do I say the best team, because maybe the best team I coached wasn't that successful, but they achieved the best performance that they could play.

They just weren't better than the people we were playing. :-)

When I started at Penn State, we had three in-state state scholarships and we were playing against people that were a lot better than us.

So when we started, we were getting our butt kicked by people that were better, but we had to start building the program.

It's been a very interesting 40 plus years at Penn State to this point.

Thanks for the availability and even more for your insights, coach Rose.

Some extra's.

'Players reveal the 40-year secret to Russ Rose's unprecedented success at Penn State' - ESPN.com article (nothing beats your own players respecting you, and seeing you as their mentor...for life. Mushy but true)

2. 'The Art of Coaching Volleyball' digital platform - numerous resources for coaches at any level. The Art of Coaching Volleyball was built to produce a steady flow of good ideas from expert sources in the hope that coaches will use the information to chart their own path. (that sounds familiar...:-))



