===== SESSION: https://volleybrains.com/joop-alberda/ =====

----- VIDEOS -----
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kW7mQ2H7yEo
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Swfo3WcmByo
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rbJ3fkcG2eA
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=phK4mKCUvLs
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LsOaSSY8Xog
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6aL9COFf09k
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zZZfXzOmaUY
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MnNO7ktniF4

----- TEXTO -----
20. Joop Alberda:'Success is all about communication and trust, not having success...also.'

A game that many coaches mention as their favorite one and also my personal favorite is the Olympic final at Atlanta in 1996, The Netherlands winning a 5 set match against Italy. Today we share the story of Joop Alberda, iconic coach of that Dutch team.

For this masterclass we start out with 2 excerpts that we copied from Joop's induction into the International Volleyball Hall of Fame.

'The architect of the highly successful Netherlands Men’s National Volleyball Teams of the 1990s, Joop Alberda soon became a legendary figure within the program and the sport.  Even in his early years coaching, Alberda always had a sense of the system of training and coaching style necessary to be successful on the volleyball world stage.'

'After his golden mission, Alberda was approached by the Dutch Olympic Committee to serve as its Technical Director.  Serving in that role from 1997 to 2004, the visionary Alberda was responsible for all sports-related issues such as innovation, coaching, Olympic facilities and programs.  His direction of “Performance 2000” led to a record 25 Dutch medals at the 2000 Olympic Games in Sydney. He later served as the technical director for the Dutch Volleyball Federation from 2006 to 2010.'

Also in the last few years(Joop announced his retirement just days ago...more on that below) Joop was the technical director for the Dutch Volleyball Federation setting them up for even more future success.

Over the years Joop has been putting a lot of effort into various national and also smaller scale projects concerning the broader context of sports in the Dutch society, focusing on long term societal improvements in terms of movement and health.

Enter Joop...

Joop, tell us, how did you become a volleyball coach?

I was a gymnast and a soccer player and played a little bit of tennis. So I did a wide range of different sports. At one point I had to make a choice and I made the wrong choice.

I went into gymnastics, to find out that I was too tall and not strong enough. Then at 17 years of age I entered my physical education studies in Groningen(Holland).

I played some recreational volleyball and when I entered my studies, there was a possibility to become a member of a volleyball society. Over there someone developed a way of looking at talent and made me become a volleyball player.

I got addicted to the sport because of my fondness about statistics, the reproduction of the game and the sequence of the game.

In 1983-1984, I was selected  to go to a certain conference in Båstad in Sweden.

The speakers there were Carmelo Bosco, Anders Kristiansson and Doug Beal. I don't think I slept any time at all, if I recall it correctly. It was one of the most exciting and thrilling experiences in my life.

We were discussing with them until four or five o'clock at night. And when I returned, I knew what my vision would be about volleyball and that I wanted to learn even more.

Volleyball was at that moment just starting to become a bit less recreational. Some Dutch teams, like Brother Martinus with Peter Murphy as a technical director were starting to get into serious volleyball.

I became the junior coach of the national junior team in 1980-1982. And my fascination with the game increased and increased.

I wanted to become a coach because I knew pretty fast that I was not going to be a good player. I was addicted to the game. But I knew that I was not tall enough. I was motivated by heart.

In the early days we practiced maybe more outside of the gym and outside of the club facility, we always went for an extra four or five workouts, by ourselves we would hire small venues to be able to do that.

So that's my basic story about becoming a head coach.

Knowing what you know now, which advice would you give to your younger self?

Everything is related to everything. I have trouble to see volleyball only as the skills and the team.

It's the skills, it's the people in the context of the society, in the context of their nature and their maturity.

It's in the context of communication, it's in the context of what does sport mean in your society? That's what fascinates me.

In my mind a team's interest is far more than what happens in the club. It's not only the team, it's also their individual education. It's the long-term vision for how you look at people as people.

How is your approach as a coach towards your players in general. This is something that changed in the late eighties because of a more 'positive behavior' coaching approach.

Not looking at the players and what they're doing wrong, but telling them what they're doing right. It took me about four or five years to get that shift in my mindset.

To me, mindset is the most crucial thing at the beginning of your coaching career.

After that you have that foundation you can pay attention to the crucial parts of the game, different strategies and not worrying about your own skills as a coach.

In the beginning you need to develop your skills.

As a coach for example you have to know how you have to coach someone who's 20 years old, and that that is completely different than coaching someone at 32 years of age.

Developing different policies for different players and handling the day to day of it for example, that's a thing that some coaches struggle with...

In your opinion is there a plan or a vision to being a successful coach?

I'm at the age of the question mark, maybe...questioning: is there one sacred road? Is there one single vision leading to success?

What's the part of luck, is it 1%, 2%? I feel and see that there are a lot of people, coaches that think that their idea is the definite one, the only right one...

When I discovered volleyball, I talked to 'thousands' of people, more or less, asking them: Hey, how did you do that? Hey, what's is your approach? What's your approach to make players realise their dreams, their goals.

That investigative attitude, that is very hard to find in players and in coaches.

To be really curious and not relying on just 'the internet' or just believing something because it's presented in a certain way, making things look 'simple' when they aren't... denying the history of your sport.

But I don't want to sound negative either, on a global scale the sport of volleyball is improving and growing. Which also means that there are coaches who are breaking the paradigm and making our sport better.

There's more money inside the whole system.

As a coach maybe 'trial and error' is one of the best things we can offer kids. A modern coach shouldn't make a very strict training program and win or lose, good or bad progression of their players just to blindly stick to that fixed program...that is not the way.

No, the new coach is adaptive, they know a lot. There shouldn't be secrets anymore, all the information is out there.

But my question mark is: where does the young generation find their personal truth and how do they become really successful and fulfilled, because that's the bottom line in sports.

So that fundamental curiosity. Which is so important, I want to find that in more people.

It's their road to success, or their road to personal fulfilment, they are the ones that have to do it.

Of course there are coaches with a fixed opinion...on the other hand you have coaches that are lifelong learners but who don't seem to know what to implement, first. A 'built in' review system to tackle the information overload is crucial.

And together with that goes staying humble in terms of success.

Don't blame yourself. Don't blame others, but also don't take the full responsibility of the success.

There's a difference between success of a team of the process and your own success.

Journalism in general and social media in particular tend to blend all these together.

Look at Southgate. He's subbing three players, which is a good decision to sub three players in preparation for a penalty series. But then people(the jury) wait first for the result and then go back and tell him it was a bad decision.

It was not a bad decision. It was a good decision.

It turned out to get the wrong results. That's something completely different. The decision was a good one. Of course the media and 'the people' look at the results and not why the decision was made.

We are talking about soccer now, a sport with a huge financial foundation. Short term and for the most part not lucrative contracts don't make it easy for pro volleyball coaches.

On one side coaches are hired to be fired. We try to avoid it though; because if you want to learn, you have to make mistakes.

That's also the thing that we say to our players: make mistakes, please make a lot of mistakes on the moment that we like you to make mistakes, that is in practice in friendly games, but don't make mistakes in the finals of the Olympics, please.. That's the language of sport.

Then you have the language of the board members and the administration, that's a completely different language. If someone makes a mistake, the team doesn't come out of a losing streak, they're going to fire him/her...which means that you're not allowed to learn.

I just heard this story of a friend of mine, who's working on Wall Street, he lost 30 million dollars in one day.

And he was curious what his boss would say about that. His boss said, okay, no problem. I can sub you. But then the next one is going to make the same mistake and I'm going to lose 30 million again. Please stay. Remember how you did it, review the process and never make the mistake again. Stay with us because you just learned an important lesson and you became a better investor for the company.

The dependency of a coach to a team and a team to a coach is also an interesting thing.

Winning something like an Olympic gold medal does also skew reality a bit. I mean ,1996, winning Olympic Gold was a pivotal point in my life.

But you got to be humble about it. It's the players who play the game and make me look good and make the Federation look good. Make Dutch sport look good.

Dutch sports developed a lot through the years, it's fascinating that sometimes on some positions we are still criticizing the whole system.

A small break to showcase some of the great clips created by the CEV. Joop Alberda who builds his 'ultimate' volleyball team.

Going back to the 90's...you became the Dutch National team head coach after they had won a silver medal in Barcelona in 92. You were new in that role, you changed a lot of things to increase the team's 1996 medal chances. Can you talk a bit about that.

It was a lot of work. A lot of questions also.

My way of thinking about volleyball and the way I wanted to play took about 3 years, to convince the players that we had, to play different than in the 92 Olympics.

Although we were 2nd in 1992, my belief was, if we would play in the same way as we did in 92, we would become 5th.

Brazil, the gold medalist of 92, became 5th in 96, and I know they copied more or less their entire preparation towards success for 92 in 1996.

And there arrived all of a sudden, this small guy from the north of the Netherlands, no international experience, not a former international volleyball player. So the first thing I had to do was make them sit on the bench to have a different position towards them. :-)

Also the entire context, like I said before, had to change around our national team. A lot of work went into that.

So going back to the beginning I cannot see a process like that without the context of society, the context of the Federation, the context of the players, maturity, skills.

The need for support from the media was a big one.

So the first deal we struck I got appointed head coach, was that I called the 4 biggest newspapers and the most important Dutch broadcasting company.

I told them, I'm relying on you guys. If you think that this team deserves a second chance in the Olympics, you are going to play a very, very crucial role because you are making the team big and you together with our own intermediary results need to grow the expectations around our team, you are also responsible.

If the media isn't in tune. The sponsors back off. The audience backs off.

A bit of smart work, but a lot of hard work on the practice court and in every international competition, that was also needed of course.

It's looking for resistance. It's constantly looking for a little bit of less comfort. Trevor Ragan calls this the jungle tiger versus the zoo tiger.

And I prefer the jungle tiger, but that's a hard process. If the tigers are living in the zoo, they don't survive easily outside in the jungle.

I made my players go to Italy from 1992 to 1996 to get exposed to the jungle experience, to return to the national team with a new expectation, but also with a new professional attitude in a non-professional environment like the Dutch volleyball Federation still was.

I'm proud that I can say that we were laying the foundation for a new age of professional sports development in the Netherlands.

As a new coach, before winning, how believable were you? To convince them, that's not an easy task for sure.

To convince them to remain objective and to be supportive towards the goal. That was a biggest issue in those days.

But I'm glad that we all got together and supported each other, that was the way.

This year it's 25 years ago that we won that gold medal.

I'm proud that the Bankras model, which is how it was called when we selected these players to dedicate their life to volleyball, that that became the foundation for sports and Olympic sports development in the Netherlands.

Final rally of Atlanta 1996...(many coaches and my personal all time most favorite match!)

How did your role change after winning that gold medal, because that was the last time we saw you coaching.

So in the night after we won the Olympic gold, the chairman of the Olympic committee asked me: 'whatever you do, you don't go to Italy to coach a team. I want you to translate this system that you created for volleyball and translate that to different sports, our Olympic sports and develop a new system, a new structure and a new attitude.'

So that's what I did. That's what happened in the night after the gold medal.

And immediately you were sure of that decision?

To train our team til the Olympics I had already made that decision in December of 1995.

I was tired, worn out. I have a lot of respect for coaches like Giovanni Guidetti or Andrea Giani. They go from a club team to the national team from a club team to the national team and so on.

My pitfall is that I always become too involved in my teams, so I could not function like that.

I needed the break to refresh my mind. To refresh my body as well.

The question was always on my mind: can I transform the system I played with the Dutch team with some exceptional players, but also with a new dimension in volleyball, which we developed based on the 92 Olympics...

Could I transform that system to another team?

And the answer is no, that system was dedicated to that team in that era based on their skills and their maturity.

So back then, to tackle your new career as technical director of the NOC*NSF (Dutch sports federation and Olympic committee) and later on as technical director of the Nevobo (Dutch volleyball federation) which countries did you study? Which methods stood out?

I started out with different national federations and with our Olympic committee, I went to Australia, Eastern Germany(or the philosophy of what was left of it), Italy, France. UK, which was on a very low level, I thought by that time.

And if I look back we did more or less most of the things that the GDR(former Eastern Germany) was doing, looking at increasing our medal tally...which is a questionable thing if you're at already between 20 and 30 medals, which is maybe your exact part if you look at it on a global scale.

But we were doing more or less the same thing.

Defining talent at an early age, categorise athletes, we say you're not so suitable for a marathon, so please go to the sprint, etc

Of course the GDR was selling their own ideology, what we did was putting sports into an economic model.

But the basic principles are more or less the same. Invest in those sports of which you think that you can make a breakthrough.

Like women's sports on an Olympic level in the Netherlands is pretty big, it already started in Sydney; the main reason is because we have a country where women and men are equal. Everybody gets the same share. Of course there is always a discrepancy here or there...

So in a way in women's sports there is an easier way towards the top because a lot of countries don't have the equality in gender, merely being early and investing will bring you rather high already in the rankings. Men's sports 'started' earlier, there is a bigger density.

So for me it's also interesting to look at countries where they do have that difference between genders. Why are they doing the things that they do?

Also towards my athletes I ask them: Did you go(play) in a country where the Olympic and the world standard is being produced and did you found out how they are doing things?

We've made a lot of money available for coaches and athletes to go to countries to find these things out also; because Northern Africa is different than Eastern Africa, and Eastern Africa is different than Western Africa.

Talking about 'systems', the Italian system was also interesting because there were some 'magicians' working there, doing crazy things and having crazy concepts about high performance, which was so unlogical to me. I tried to find out how their system worked.

Can you go into more detail on that?

I'm talking about Dr. Ferrara and the EPO development, the use of performance enhancing drugs and the control of these drugs in the GDR and Russia and in Italy.

I also talked to a lot of people who won a gold medal. They told me how they 'made it'.

And a lot of times I also talked to someone from their staff who was fired and they told me exactly the opposite of what the athlete/ their coach had told me.

In between there will the truth, the logic. That has proven itself to be a good way to figure things out. Interviewing both parties will give you the keys for intelligent improvement.

Philosophically though, it was Anders Kristiansson. I studied philosophy. I really think that's one of the basic foundations that all coaches should have in their education. A solid philosophical base.

Anders was a coach of mine in the early 2000's, so I'm very interested to know what these things were that stood out to you.

It was his fundamental approach, which struck me when I was in Båstad at that conference and met him the first time.

I never thought of volleyball before in that way. I had my philosophical education already.

Being the coach, the leader but putting yourself in a humble position while being so.

Knowing that there are different ways to approach a problem. And if people have a different belief, you have to guide them in an individual way. You can not just push your own agenda and think people will follow.

Another thing he said was: Hey, the volleyball is your friend, never kick it. Don't forget that the ball needs to do exactly what you want it to do.' He said that with a straight face while he held the ball like he took care of it.

It sounds funny now and I never knew how serious he was about that, but it impressed me in that moment. Of course like any other kid in Europe, we are using our feet to play with a ball. In the US you start throwing a ball when you see one, in Europe we kick it.

That was just one small anecdote, these stick by you.

But it was his personal attitude towards playing volleyball, what it means to be part of a team, the importance of everybody on that team having the same goal...for that day and age, it was really a new way of thinking. It really impressed me.

(Anders Kristiansson is a Volleyball Hall of Fame member since 2017, he was mentioned by Tommi Tiilikainen as his mentor and we had a long videocall with  Anders last week, so you can expect that Masterclass in the future)

Today in Dutch volleyball, what is an opportunity that is underused and that according to you would raise the general level of the game?

For Dutch volleyball, as we already said in the nineties and it is still very true, the Dutch national team is bigger than the sport(national competition) itself.

The level we are playing internationally is so far away from our national competition.

It's the obligation of the Federation to bring the coaches to international events, to make them aware of what is really happening on the international courts.

We are technically speaking, in our own Dutch competition, playing sloppy volleyball with low speed. So that is what you develop: low speed serve-reception, low speed serves, low speed defense.

And then all of a sudden with these not elaborated technical skills our players playing in our national competition come into the national team, and you get exposed to Nimir Abdel-Aziz serving at 130km/h...when do they see that speed, they see that speed only when they're playing with Nimir.

On one side, I'm happy because there are player agents, but at the other time, an agent just puts them somewhere, which is most of the time, not the best place to go.

The players do that as an adventure, as an internship for little money and no improvement. And that makes our national team very vulnerable.

On the other hand, it's great that 110 players of the Netherlands play in an international competition. As a personal experience, if you take away the part of the national team, it's perfect. They adapt pretty well. They speak the languages, they have experiences in return and do something with volleyball.

In terms of the national team. Especially on the men's side, it's the knowledge, the curiosity and not having the proximity of a high international level of play which is something difficult to overcome.

So I have to invite coaches, pay the coaches to travel with us to an international event and then talk about it.

That's not so easy to organise. And looking at volleyball on a screen on a two dimensional plane is something completely different than at the sidelines of the court in the gym.

So making correct decisions in player placement and developing coaches with more 'international' knowledge is something to focus on even more.

In all sports, where there is a big difference between the local competition and the international competition, well, you will have serious problems.

There are a lot of challenges and barriers to overcome and I'm always looking for the coaches and players who want to overcome them and invest in their careers.

Right now we're doing that for the women's team, we have Team 22. A one and a half year intense program to make them ready for the World Championships in Amsterdam in 2022.

We have some players who because of their age and other aspirations won't play for many more years so it's our responsibility to fine tune our young talents.

The goal is to have players that can consistently play at a top 8 level in the world, who will sometimes play for the medals and sometimes be a bit further away from that.

Of course, undeniably with having a lower level competition and limited positions for your coaches, it's hard to even imagine for an aspiring coach that they could also reach these professional levels. Assuming you can't though, already puts you back in this case...

Right. There are just a few who have the courage to do it. For most of the coaches, we are attempting to create a roadmap, that's something where we're investing in.

It is true that we still rely on some foreign national team head coaches, but developing and helping Dutch coaches could change that...all our players were 'developed' by Dutch coaches, so why not have a Dutch head coach.

From the club level to Papendal, our national Olympic training center, and from the national junior and senior teams trying to go abroad, they get relationships going, get a job abroad. And then afterwards they're being able to come back and help our national teams even more.

One of the defining things I stimulate in coaching by the way, I wanted to mention that before we wrap up, is communication.

Most of the successful coaches in all sports know the language or if the language isn't easy to learn, they get accustomed to local culture, time and time again that has been proven to be extremely useful. It's so important to know the do's and don't's, not to change your style but to be prepared.

Language in itself, it's a very important asset and it should get more emphasis in sports. Language instills improved communication and improved trust.

Thank you, Joop.

Our videocall was held last July. I had Joop on the line last Friday a few moments after he had announced to pass the torch on as Technical Director of the Nevobo (Dutch Volleyball Federation).

It was time for a more balanced work-life situation, but knowing full well that the volleyball projects that were started have been put on solid tracks, being hopeful for great results at the 2022 World Champs, 2023 Euro Champs and the Olympic Games in Paris.



