===== SESSION: https://volleybrains.com/andrea-gardini/ =====

----- VIDEOS -----
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IpH428ztTpw
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1TYlixPI-hY
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=E10J97zl_Jw
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eNpJnNJny1Q
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BpgwW-8pBrY

----- TEXTO -----
21. Andrea Gardini:'For every player you'll need a different key, your job is to find that key.'

If you are a fan of the small gold medal emoji's 🥇, you should go and take a look at Andrea Gardini's wikipedia page. There are too many World Championship, Olympic, World League and other titles to even start to count. Today we talk to the former athlete who became a successful coach.

Don't get used to these Volleyball Hall Of Fame interviews now.:-)

Andrea got inducted into the Volleyball Hall Of Fame in 2007 and this excerpt was part of Andrea's induction biography:

'Gardini, a two-time Olympic medal winner and key component of the FIVB-crowned "Best Volleyball Team of the 20th Century," was a tough, effective and popular middle blocker for the "Squadra Azzurri." Few teams in the world of sport have been as dominant as the Italian Men's Volleyball Team of the 1990s.

Gardini and the Italian team were the first-ever to win three consecutive World Championship titles (1990, 1994 and 1998). The Italian team won the Silver Medal at the 1996 Olympics in Atlanta and the Bronze at the 2000 Summer Games in. During the 1996 Olympics at Atlanta, Italy and the Netherlands played what some call the “Greatest Volleyball Match Ever” for the gold medal.'

'Gardo' went on to become a successful volleyball coach and at the moment he coaches the current Polish champion of Jastrebski Wegiel.

(oh and a small caveat, we want you to check out the various videoclips in this masterclass, there are some curse words though, this is European volleyball, everything goes to make your message heard.;-))

Enter Andrea...

Andrea, when did you decide that you wanted to become a volleyball coach?

During the 2006-2007 season I was the general manager of Sparkling Milano, a club team in the Italian Superlega.

I had some serious health issues going on so I stopped working for them to take a break and fix my health. I was out for a couple of months.

In that summer Andrea Anastasi won the European Championships with the Spanish national team. Me and Andrea, well 'Nano', that is his nickname, we go back a long time of course, we are like brothers...he called me immediately after winning and told me: I will be the head coach of the Italian national team and I want you to become my assistant coach.

I told him: 'Nano, I really never thought about this, I don't know if this is such a great idea?' He told me: 'I know you, it's going to be perfect for you.'

So I started to work as Andrea's assistant. We worked together in the national team til 2012, until the Olympic games in Beijing. After that we worked for 3 more years together in Poland, if I remember correctly.

We really did spend an amazing time together, he really teached me a lot.

How to get the best out of the players, how to handle a group of players, how to handle the ever changing composition of your team, because year after year our teams do change a lot.

Us working together was automatic. Towards the end of our time working together we didn't even have to discuss a lot, we just looked at each other and knew what the other one was thinking.

After that I thought, why not, I love this job, let's do this.

I spend a few years in Olsztyn(Poland), in Zaksa Kedzierzyn Kozle, where we won the league and the cup, I went back to Italy after that and now I'm in Jastrebski again in Poland.

I love to coach, love to work with my team and even more with the individual...I don't want to fight or convince them to do something, I want to show them what they are capable of.

Every day there is a new challenge. I love this.

You took over the team of Jastrebski at the end of last season, coming into a team that has been playing for more than half a season is a strange situation, how did that go?

They were a great group of people and I was lucky that I 'found' the key to unlock them.

We solved a lot of problems, they worked very hard and in the end we won the Polish League, while winning against Zaksa(the current Champions League winner).

This last season really has been my best experience since I started to coach. A coach has many ideas or concepts, but not a lot of times it happens that they all seem to connect, that is however what happened last season.

Til the semi finals we were struggling, but after that the pieces of the puzzle fell together.

Even while Zaksa was leading a couple of points in some sets, we were executing what we had discussed, we were doing the things we discussed...even being down those couple of points, I didn't need to take a time-out to help them tactically or technically, I just used them to take the momentum out of the game a bit.

For the rest we were like a machine.

Some parts of that final series, I could just stand there and admire our own play, that doesn't happen a lot to a volleyball coach.:-)

I'm really forever grateful to these guys, we really did something special.

What advice would you give yourself as a starting coach? An advice that is so clear and logic for you now, but that you had to develop over the years.

When I started out as an assistant coach, I had a lot of ideas about how to build a team, how to manage certain situations, how to work day in and day out. Most of them based on how we had worked in the national team in the late 80's and 90's.

But I had to throw nearly all of those concepts away, I was a teenager 40 years ago, the way people think now is totally different.

So I will have to say to myself, look at what is going on around you, open your mind and adapt.

It's impossible to tell somebody to just do something in a certain way, because you are the coach and that's the reason why they have to do it.

There is needed more than that, more input, in the end it also keeps you sharp as a coach, you need to be ready for these questions that you players have.

Probably not the best to generalise, but can we say the current players are smarter(or at least, less naive) than before...maybe more self centered even. Which maybe is not that beneficial in a team sport.

I spoke about this with my players, there is a problem about this. Sometimes the great, the best players are great players because they are a bit egotistical.

You know what I mean?

They score all the important points, they feel that they have all the responsibility.

So to convince a player like that, to stay in a fixed system, to help the team to win...and maybe also creating a more beneficial situation for their own career.

Well, that's not so easy because they became good players, because they had this big focus on their own play, their own growth.

'I'm the best. Give me the ball. I will kill every ball.'

So in their mind it is a complicated balance because they know that stuff happens because they are like that.

So they think: 'why do I have to change for this team? With these weak players around me.'

And this is the key.

You have a lot of experience in this over the years of course. My own feeling is this; only 0.01 something % of pro players reach the absolute top of our game, most of these have this... 'healthy' focus on themselves.

Being able to get there and realising that there is something to give back, that is where you can really start to make a legacy for your team and yourself of course.

In the early 90's at Messaggero Ravenna I played together with Karch Kiraly. And Karch is, in my opinion, the greatest player in the history of our sport.

But if you remember him, he wasn't an amazing spiker, he wasn't that tall.

He's fast of course, he's pretty good in defense. But it's not the typical player that you picture yourself when you think about the best player in the world.

But believe me, he is. He was. Absolutely. Because he changed the team from the inside, he stayed with the team, practiced with the team every f***ing day in the right way, without any excuses, no matter what happened. He didn't accept any 'alibi' (excuses) for anything.

The mindset that he brought in the team, the style, the love for the sport, that was great.

So because of that he became 'the best player', not because he jumped higher or spiked 'stronger'.. Absolutely not. The mind made the difference. So I got this great lesson and took that with me.

After, when I went out of Ravenna, I implemented this same mindset, to every club I went.

And many times I was lucky because we won a lot of championships, cups, everything.

It's still very clear to me that a team really needs these kind of players to become successful. The problem is that you have to find these leaders of course.:-)

A fighter, who never gives up, who pushes the players around him. Someone who doesn't let a ball bounce on the floor.

After that it becomes a virus in the team. You can build a lot in this way.

Do you have a particular goal as a coach?

I want that every player who has finished working with me, that I teached them something.

They don't need to make a huge step, but I would like that at the end, when we stop working together that this player improved a little bit.

Maybe it's only their mindset, we're not only talking about the skills because sometimes the mind is much more important.

Anyway, this is my first target.

My personal target, as a coach, of course it has to be, it should be to coach a national team that's able to win a big event, like a World Championship or the Olympic games.

I went six times to the Olympic games, six times I was at the World Championships.

So I have this dream, but I'm not going crazy about it.

The first thing is to help my players, to find a way, to improve a bit. Even if we maybe work together for just a couple of months.

Last season, I had an amazing experience with Lukas Kampa. In my opinion he's a great setter. We really didn't have to improve his setting.

At the end of the season, he had improved his court presence, his personality on the court. And believe me after those three months of working, I was so happy.

And I told Lukas, I'm really happy (because we won, coach), no, we won, but you are a different player right. 'Coach, you are right. I feel different. I feel that I have the personality right now to really manage a team.'

And for me, that was great. That was much more important than winning the league.

According to you, what rule change is necessary in the future? And why would you want to see this new rule implemented?

We have a problem in our sport, the referees who uses the whistle all the time. We are stopping at every moment.

Every time we are stopping for something and this is killing our sport, in my opinion.

So what am I thinking, we have to find a way to solve this problem, to make the show way more interesting.

I think we have to cut the whistle of the referee entirely. There aren't that many sports where the action starts with the whistle of the referee.

When somebody starts to get the ball to serve, everybody knows that they are going to serve. For example.

We have to have an open mind to try and change these things.

Another thing that I don't understand is, why do we still have a whistle for the setting, for the setting mistakes? If there is a bad or double contact, it already creates a problem for that team. So for sure, every coach will teach their players to set in the right way, to set a perfect ball.

So if you make a sh**ty set, continue to play. You know what I mean.

We need to find a way to not interrupt our game all the time. Because if I'm watching the matches in TV, I need to ask my scouter to cut all of the actions where nobody touches the ball, by the way, I spent two hour and a half, to see a match and the ball is only being touched for one hour and 10 or 20 minutes.

So I think that in my opinion, modest opinion, the future should go in that direction. We can not stop at every second for every action.

Technical fauls?

Already we have these serves at 130 km/h where the action finishes in an instant. When somebody makes a bad set, the referee whistles.

The referee is not a coach. It's a referee.

I'm sorry.

This is exactly what I think. You know, this is my idea for the future, because I know that in the future, we continue to have players that will jump higher, be more powerful and the ball becomes at you at higher speeds.

Right now, the service sometimes is unbelievable. It's also hard to see where the ball finishes, 'Coach, in or out' I don't know it's close to me, but it's too fast. You need the challenge system even at practice.

So we have to find a way to not stop every action. Let the players play.

Also right now at the Olympic games, they don't want this carried tip ball. But what is the difference? Sometimes the difference between touching it a bit longer or shorter is nothing, come on, let the player play.

Maybe also some players who are not 2.10 meters tall can play like an OH and can finish some balls. What's the problem? Cause everybody only needs to spike hard?

I was proposing this to the Superliga in Italy. All the coaches over there, maybe they are older than me, they say it's impossible to make these changes because the set has be perfect. The tip ball has to be perfect.

And we will never change a thing if we continue to think in this old way.

You know what? I prefer to try something new, maybe we'll make a mistake and have to change it again, but if we stay the same, like in my job, if I do the same things day in and day out, in the end I'll lose, I'm sure.

I have to find something new, a new concept. Even just to give different inputs to the players.

Right now, if I give the same exercise for two weeks, my players start to go 'coach, I'm bored', it's boring when you keep on doing the same exercise. So also there change is beneficial, in the same way we need to change something about our game.

Because I'm sure that if we'll have less breaks, for sure our game will become more interesting.

This is my idea for the future.

You can send the info also to the FIVB. They will be happy about that.:-)

Let's talk about player and team characteristics. What are characteristics you like to see in your players. How do you balance out your team.

The most stable reception possible. Years ago I thought that having 3 big spikers would be enough to win a good amount of games. The last few years the importance of your receiving capabilities became even more important.

Right now I still prefer to have 1 or 2 big spikers in my team, but the technical receiving work became more important.

A good friend and former setter told me once; okay you have these great spikers, but only one spiker can spike the ball.:-) Why have more. Of course he was joking, but there is some truth in there also.

So the balance between having a few top scorers and the reception stability is an important one. Even though that some serves are so hard these days that it's about 'saving' the ball and not about being accurate.

A player that I consider a top outside spiker is Leal, for example, even though he improved his receiving over the years, undeniably he's still a pure spiker.

Another example is Kubi, Michael Kubiak, this last season he wasn't in shape, but when he is healthy he probably has all the skills that you need in a player, I'm also talking about his winner mindset here. He is somebody that truly never gives up.

When they won the World Championships with Poland, Kubi was amazing.

So the balance between these 2 types of players can be interesting.

Talking about setters, of course a setter needs to be precise, no doubt about that. But in the end it's all about knowing what's going on, even more so in his own team than about the opposing side.

Who is in the game, who can I feed the ball in what kind of situation; the score 20-20 now, how is everybody going and looking.

As a coach you also need to trust your setter in these cases of course. In my opinion Toniutti is one of the best setters in the world, we know each other very good...

Well, when he's not playing first tempo's, I know that he feels that the middle player doesn't have his timing right, and I know that I need to talk with my middle, not with my setter. When the middle is back in the game, he'll get balls again.

With a setter like that, of course this is the 'ultimate coaching experience', in some of those situations he is doing my job, he's making everything easier for everybody.

About middle blockers. Being a middle blocker right now is really hard, the game became so, so fast. I'm talking a lot to my guys during practice, it's not like before that you can use a 'system' like 'read and react' or something. The first tempo attack is sometimes so high above the net, with 3 other quick possibilities leaving the setter's hands.

I really understand why they are frustrated sometimes. Against some teams we really need to make a game plan of options, leaving a gap in the block, totally not looking at certain spikers etc.

It's so much about mindset, you only play a part of the game, you don't touch a ball, you get few sets, you miss your serve, back on the bench waiting for your round. That is really not easy for them. I know that they sometimes think, what the **** am I doing here.

But also there, mindset, we need players that are hungry, see solutions, want to try to make things happen.

For sure for middles, often times they are doing great moves for an entire game and they just have 1 or 2 blocks, a few touches and another guy is nowhere, doesn't help the defensive line one bit but makes 5 kill blocks. :-)

About the libero position...

Well, I want my libero to manage the entire receiving line. Let me explain. We talked a lot about the crazy jump serve speeds today, it is impossible to cover 9 meters on those hard serves.

In Poland we are doing this for a while now, in Italy they are catching up. We have the stats, we know the serving 'cone', triangle...the position where most of a certain player's serves go. We need to be there of course.

The extremes for example, with some players, sideline position 1 we just leave. We even leave nearly 2 meters sometimes. If the ball goes there, we maybe have the ability to do a crazy save, but probably the ball is gone.

That's the risk we need to take. If we don't do that, we open up our entire court, our entire receiving line gets destroyed, we can not have that happen.

Zatorski (the libero from Poland and Zaksa) is a great example of somebody who's managing his receiving line. I want my libero to call the shots, he decides when to move, what to cover on which player, that is his main responsibility.

Ah one of my favourite subjects, giving responsibility is a big one, a big chapter in the 'modern coaches' handbook.:-)

The libero is the captain of the receiving line, the middle blocker is the captain of the blocking line, the setter is the captain of the spiking line.

Of course when there is an issue, ask me, talk to me, that's why the coach is there. But that responsibility is important. A coach needs to be able to give that to their players.

Yes, some players, they give it back. :-)

But...some players build on this responsibility and get to new highs, highs that you couldn't even imagine they could reach.

If I, the coach, am the only one who cares about everything that's going on in the gym. Well, nothing will change, nothing will happen.

When you give them the responsibility and they pick it up, well of course they care about everything that's happening.

'Coach, can I do a bit extra of this exercise, ...' Immediately you see your team changing.

When preparing a new opponent, your next game, how does your general approach look like and did you ever change your approach?

Okay. First of all, nothing special. I create a style for my team.

We play according to our own style, a style of play that we stabilise and own. So everyone knows that, this is the style. So everyone knows who made the mistake, who is responsible, if something happens.

Sometimes the opponent scores a point because they spiked a great ball, nothing wrong with that.

So I have this style and after we can adapt this style according to our opponent.

Working like that helps me to have, maybe not a very, very short video meeting but in the video meeting we want to 'fix' or highlight a certain opponent characteristic.

We don't need to talk about everything.

For example, I stopped preparing every rotation of the opponent team. I prepare some specific situations about maybe where the setter sets when he moves in 2 or in 4, long distance, when they play 1st tempo, it depends. Some rotations have specific situations. So we should be focused on them, but some don't.

So about the normal rotations, I say nothing.

We have our style and we adapt when we need to.

Most of the time I prefer to not give too much information to my players.

You know what I mean? The info gets divided between the departments: receivers watch the serve, blockers the opponent setter etc

And after they have to know just a few things.

When you are in a key moment of the game. Key meaning  24-24, 22-22, a really difficult situation. And your team is struggling, you don't finish any ball, you don't touch the ball in block, you are in big trouble.

I remember that my mind, maybe remembers one or two things. Maybe. Most of the time, when the ball got in the hands of the setter, everything became white. I forgot everything, this happened many times.

And I always considered myself an intelligent player. :-)

So I remember I studied a lot of things, but truly speaking, when you play, you can only have a few things on your mind, it's impossible to remember everything.

So I try to reduce the information. And sometimes the players tell me: 'Coach they do it like that.' Yeah, they also do this guys, but we just react to these actions, on the other stuff we play our game.

If you remember 2 or 3 of these points in the key moments of the game, I'm really happy. Really. I don't ask you more, just remember this. Because sometimes when you start to think, it's too late.

So I reduced the info as much as I can to be clear, but if I was right, that will be decided after we will be done.

And there is an opportunity here as well. They need to have the ability to decide themselves in those key moments.

So I would like to prepare my players for that. I will tell what we do as a team, but in the end, there's one moment that I don't want to drive you, I don't have a joystick, this isn't a video game.

I don't want to drive you like that. I want you to make your own decision. If you make your own decision in a key moment and we lose. I can't tell you nothing. Because I respect you. I will prepare you for these moments, but if you doubt yourself in those moment, well, we're messed up.

We had periods with Nano(Anastasi) that we studied everything, but in the end with the staff we reduce this information, less, guys, less, only a small bit of clear information. And we work with that.

Focus on the few important things. To do an elaborate preparation of your opponent, I love it for sure. We have Datavideo, we have Volleymetrics. We have Hudl right now, my friend Guiseppe Vinci made some amazing programs. I love him. He sends me everything.

And I watch all that, a folder of 42 pages for every opponent, but it's hard to use when you play.

Matias, you remember this, you know what I mean.:-)

I remember something, yes.:-)

Coaching and failure, do you have a specific insight on that?

The most important lesson here, is don't be afraid to fail.

You can't do this job if you're afraid to fail. There are so many variables, it's impossible to make 'calculated' predictions in sports.

Everything can go perfectly, everything looks great and a key player gets injured during an important part of your season and you are messed up. This can always happen.

My last season in Italy was a failure, I had to leave the head coaching position before the season even started. I wanted to at least try to make something great over there.

I regrouped as fast as possible, tried to reassess what I could've done differently. But sometimes there isn't even an answer, sometimes it just happens.

If you can make the strongest 'starting six' in the world, right now. What would your team look like?

The guys from Modena, I'm curious how that will go...so Bruno, N'Gapeth and Leal.

Jenia(Grebennikov) on the libero position.

Opposite... I would pick Sokolov.

Middles: Podrascanin, Potke. I also like Lisinac though...but I don't want to name 2 Serbian guys, to be honest.:-)

My other middle will be Piotr Nowakowski.

Who will coach this team, before you said you just needed 1-2 real spikers, in this team everybody will want the ball.:-)

Yeah, you don't need a coach with that team. :-)

What are resources you use to educate yourself?

Now it's difficult or impossible, but as the COVID restrictions get looser and for sure after our season...I like to visit other coaches.

Bernardo Rezende, Vital Heynen, Tillie...every time I ask them if I can enter their practice I'm allowed and I can ask any question I want. We share experiences and I try to learn something.

I don't have to like every exercise they do, but many times I find out something new. Mostly exercises with enough repetition with the right amount of individual actions...those things I like.

Every great coach has an open door policy, at least that is my experience. Some coaches think there is some kind of secret, volleyball is volleyball, there are no real secrets...but they do what they want of course.

What advice would you give to a smart, driven young coach about to enter the  “professional coaching world”?

Number one and true for everything you do. Be yourself. Don't play a certain role, don't try to be a tough coach, if you are not.

Be true to your own character. Don't try to be like Velasco.

And most importantly, your players 'smell' when you are not truly yourself. :-) You don't want that...at all.

Secondly, never grow tired of looking for solutions. For every player you'll need another key, your job is to find out how to open the door. There is never one definite way.

If you could have a gigantic billboard anywhere with anything on it — metaphorically speaking, getting a message out to every athlete or coach on the globe — what would it say and why?

My favorite is this one: 'Never give up.'

Everything is inside of those 3 words, nothing needs to be added. Everybody uses this quote, it's being used to commonly.

It's easy to use, but not so easy to do.:-)

What new belief, behaviour, or habit has most improved your life?

All about being healthier. I try to sleep 8 hours, it's not always possible with this job, so I try to take a nap here or there.

There is a lot of stress in this job, I talk about this with other coaches. Most of them try to focus on being as healthy as possible...to have an answer to the stress that we are under.

I feel more confident the healthier that I get. In the past I questioned myself a lot. I still have these questions, but I keep a more open mind.

I think about what I'm doing right now, the next period. But much less about next year or what will come after that.

Having an open mind means that I can still receive all the information, it's on me to decide if I use this information to change any process or not.

This makes me way less stressful, I know that on a whim my situation can change. We talked about that earlier, I had that experience already, I know I can manage that situation. And I know that I will have a new opportunity whatever happens.

When you feel overwhelmed or unfocused, what do you do?

After a bad game I focus on the feeling that I had when we won a game, when the guys played a nice game of volleyball, when everything worked out.

That positive feeling is important to me and I build my (bad) day on that. We will lose some games, but we will also win games again, that positive emotion is important to me.

Of course I feel like sh*t when we lose, I'm sorry, I have to be honest about that. But restarting as fast as possible, that is what I do on those days.

Thank you, Gardo.



