===== SESSION: https://volleybrains.com/craig-skinner/ =====

----- VIDEOS -----
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RdWyjM5x1pM
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GQrCf53mY78
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=31S8k42Q1Tg
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LJ44H_KXKQc
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WeDIhFRAjk0
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_VHSIxJBdCk
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FptyRbZ4Cs4
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SofAlSFoLa8
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3XUbSMw-Mxw

----- TEXTO -----
22. Craig Skinner:"If you stop learning, then you're doing yourself and your team a disservice."

Craig Skinner is the head coach of the Kentucky Wildcats. The 2020 NCAA National Champions. Since arriving at Kentucky, Craig has rejuvenated the Kentucky volleyball program into national prominence and has directed the Wildcats to 16 consecutive NCAA Tournaments.

Coach Skinner is the current AVCA National Coach of the Year. An award that is a culmination of all the deliberate and hard work put into the Kentucky program.

'Last season, Skinner guided the Wildcats to a 19-1 overall regular season record, and a fourth-straight SEC Championship, something that has never been done in the history of Kentucky Volleyball.

They went on and played a big NCAA tournament and won the finals against the Texas Longhorns. Becoming the 2020 NCAA National Champions'

We are fans of great volleyball. And for sure enjoyed seeing Kentucky play their low error, high % scoring in 'out of system', up tempo off the net - plays...last spring.

We went over a lot in this interview with coach Skinner. Also check out the 'extra' at the end.

Enter Craig...

Craig, why did you decide to commit to become a professional volleyball coach? What pushed you towards that decision?

I coached while I was playing in college. I played at Ball State University. Played as an outside hitter and started coaching a JV, a high school team and a club team and just fell in love with it.

I just really appreciate and respected the way the right information can help people get better.

I would say just as I got more into coaching...I was questioning whether that was the thing I wanted to do, because I had an accounting degree and I could go into business and probably financially, at least for the first half of my career, do better than I could in coaching.

But I talked to a basketball coach here in the States and I asked him why he coached.

And he said, coaching is the only thing in my life where I feel like I can be an artist or be creative.

I feel the same way. There's not a lot of things I'm very creative or artistic at.

Coaching seemed to be something where I could put some artistic value into.

So for me those two things are the reason why I coach.

What advice would you give yourself as a starting coach? An advice that is so clear and logic for you now, but that you had to develop over the years.

I probably wasn't very patient when I was younger.

I was trying to get to the next thing faster and trying to get to the next skill quicker.

And, you know, I think you need to spend more time, on whether it's teaching a skill or teaching a system for your team.

I was doing drills all over the place... and I think you have to have a core set of drills that you feel are important for your particular team. And you need to do them over and over and over again.

For two reasons, one to improve, but secondly, to develop confidence in your players.

And if you do different drills every day in practice and there's no continuity between days and weeks, then it's harder for players to get better.

And it's harder for players to develop confidence in themselves and the team.

So I was just pretty impatient. Both as a coach and then also professionally, I just wanted my career to go a little bit faster than it was.

What are concepts or beliefs where you put more importance on over the years. What changed about your coaching style over the last few years. And why?

Yeah, I'd say that we spent more time talking and trying to implement more of the mental side of the game.

And getting them to understand, what being mindful was and why it's important.

And that when you're trying to win at the highest level, that it's more than just volleyball.

If it's only about X's and O's, and only about volleyball, people get bored of that, there needs to be a bigger purpose to what we're doing.

For the players to be more motivated, to want to do it for others, not just because I'm going to get better at attacking or I'm going to get better at receiving or I'm going to get better at serving.

And volleyball specifically, something that we started working more on is..well everyone talks about being out of system and you have to be as good out of system as you are in system because 50% of the game is out of system.

So during training, prior to the last few years, we'd spend a lot of time really trying to be good at defending teams in system.

Defending when the ball is passed perfectly, that we need to be really good read blockers and to defend 'this' we need to be in this position 'here', we need to be in that position, there.

So repeating over and over and over again, running certain plays at our defense and trying to get really good at defending those plays.

And some plays that we know our opponents would run at us and also plays that we would run just so we would get better offensively at those plays at the same time, trying to work on them defensively.

We would go for four balls and then we'd rotate blockers or rotate defense.

And we do three or four of them all in system.

And then the last couple of years we did two of them...half of them in system, then half of them we'd go out of system. So I felt not only did that help us become better at defending when the opponent is hitting out of system, whether that's a high ball to the left side or a high ball to the right side or a high ball to the back row, that we also in turn got better at attacking those balls.

Being better offensively in those situations.

So I'd say those would probably be the two biggest things that we evolved over the last few years.

When preparing the 'next game', what does your general approach look like.

Well, typically we probably have two good days of practice before we play our next game, once we get into our conference schedule.

So you might have a day where you're training some fundamentals or don't want to jump a whole lot because you want to keep your team fresh. And then you probably have a couple of days where you can go pretty hard.

And so I'd say we try and focus one of those days on offense and one of those days on defense and it's not always exactly like that, but we try to be more offensive based on one day and defensive based on the other day.

As we get closer to game week, we've try and give them three different ways to prepare for the opponent.

Video, paper and an on-court walkthrough of some specific scouted situations.

Eventually, they will have two video sessions with scouting materials along with those and two on-court sessions where we're going through a few rotations on one day and a few rotations on the next day.

So that gives them an in system perspective on how the team is going to come at us. We've already prepared enough out a system. We don't need, obviously do that as much.

So that's kind of a typical weekend.

On a shorter timeframe. If we play on a Friday and a different opponent on a Sunday, then we only have a day in between so we try and give the right information, but we don't try and overload with information.

In that case you don't have as many days to input a game plan.

That's kind of how we approach a game week.

That's a very deliberate, sensible routine. Did you ever change that approach?

Well, everybody learns differently,  not everyone learns exactly the same.

So some people are visual learners, they'll do best when they review a video. Some people are tangible learners, they like the in person walkthrough and some people read and regurgitate exactly what they read.

I think that's why it's important to have three different ways.

I'd say the other thing is, you know, to me, I love doing that stuff. I love game planning, scouting, I just really enjoy that piece of it.

And I did it for a long time when I worked with John Cook and then when I first got to Kentucky.

The last several years my associate head coach does the bulk of our scouting and it's really beneficial for us because he can spend more time than I am able to.

Because of my responsibilities in my role, I had less of a chance to really get more into the scouting and decipher what is the important information to give the team and what isn't.

And sometimes less is more. We don't always have to give 50 pieces of information because we're not going to learn all those pieces of information.

So deciding what are the actual important things that they need to learn? That is key.

How do go over  the opponent's information with your setters? You went from having a first team All American senior setter last season, with Madison Lilly, to having a talented starting freshman setter this year. That for sure also brings a different kind of preparation.

We do video with our setters and we show them how the opponents blocking system is and how they defend certain things.

In our particular rotations how do we want to attack them? Do we want to try and establish the middle first or not?

Do we want to be balanced in this particular match and make sure that our distribution is really good or do we not need to be balanced because the team we're playing isn't nearly as good defending one side of the net or the other.

I think too often coaches say, well, we have to be balanced or we have to establish the middle in this particular match but that may not be always the case.

In theory, you have to give more information to a younger setter, but you also have to be careful with that as well.

What is your view on proposed rule changes. With US college coaches we always talk about the substitution 'system', that's the obvious one...

That's always an interesting question because the international coaches and the national team coaches want the college game to be closer to their rules and college coaches like the college rules.

The big conversation always is substitutions.

Internationally, you only get six substitutions and you go in one time a game.

And so should college volleyball follow that?

So do I think we need 15 substitutions?

I don't, I think it'd probably be better at 10 to 12 so there is some balance and you're still getting the benefit of using more defensive specialists, libero's and also having some players playing all around.

Having less subs is an ideal situation, if you have outside hitters, being able to play six rotations, as long as they can effectively attack out of the back row.

Some people think, yes, I'm hitting out of the back row. Well, what is your hitting percentage out of the back row? If it's  0.125 then you're really defeating the purpose of setting it.

So those are the contemplations.

You know the challenge review, we're experimenting with a challenge review system this year that's different than what the college rule is. And I kind of think it should be like tennis, where you get one challenge per set. And if you win it, you get it back.

If you lose it, then it's gone, but you don't accumulate it for the next set. It's just always 1 per set.

I think that's the ones that come to mind.

Yes, the current college video challenge system is a weird one, not having super high definition camera's, not having the 3D rendered system.

Exactly, there are many mistakes because most of the time it's inconclusive evidence.

When you challenge back, well it's not really a thing, because the technology isn't yet good enough to make it worth it.

The 'double contact' debate is always a lively one with coaches. How do you see our sport evolving right there?

I think it's okay if a double contact is allowed on the first touch and on serve/ receive.

The ball is served so hard these days, there needs to be more range and that allows for more range in those situations.

On the second touch. We shouldn't allow a lot of range there.

It takes away from coaches. If you can't coach someone, how to set the ball, well that's our job. And if someone's in there that just can't do it, then don't have them do it.

There's a flow to it that is picturesque to people. And I think the second contact needs to demonstrate that.

I think it needs to be technically sound and you shouldn't be able to chuck the ball or butcher the ball and be okay with it.

There needs to be more put more expectations on coaches to be able to train it and teach it.

As a college program, how much are you watching pro volleyball? Do you implement a resource like that? Or how would you recommend to implement it?

We watch some international volleyball specially the setters and the setters of the USA national team.

We watch how some attackers move and what type of techniques they're using. It's become a lot easier with VolleyMetrics, easily having a lot of international matches accessible to us.

I wouldn't say that we watch it to make wholesale changes and dramatic changes each and every year, because if you start doing that and you're changing a lot then your team feels like you don't have confidence in the system that we've already run.

You know, if one fall season we're doing training and hitting the line shot like this, and then the next fall season, we're training to hit the line shot a different way, one season we're training this footwork for blocking, the next season we're doing something else...

The continuity of that is too tough.

But it's fascinating watching international.

It seems like there's a lot more variety in how setters set than there is in attackers attacking.

So I think there's some value in that. But at the same time, I don't think it's fair to ask a setter to always set like somebody else because everybody's delivery is a lot different and everyone's feet are a lot different.

But in terms of how high we're taking the ball. And where it is in relation to my head in terms of being deceptive and things like that.

There we're always trying to kind of pick up cues from setters and how they're being deceptive, how they're using their body language to give away a set or not give away a set.

Sound on: 'If your mind starts to wonder, you got to catch it quickly'

One of my personal favourite questions, because of the variety in answers that we had, is what is your favourite failure. But coming of winning the NCAA National Championship that can be a strange question. :-)

We finished second, probably four or five times in our conference before we won it.

And three of those, we lost the last match of the season. And if we won the last match of the season we would of course have won the trophy of the Conference Championship.

Those were very motivating for me and introspective to try and figure out what was it about how we train, what was it about me, our staff, ...why did we come up short.

So again, and it's not really about making wholesale changes.

Probably the first one was, I think it was 2008, when we lost 14-16 in the fifth set, we were up 14-11 in the fifth set and lost 14-19, you know. So I don't know if it's not necessarily a failure that you finish second, but in my opinion, we didn't win at all.

That was plenty of motivation for us in our program.

You talked earlier about the necessity to be a continuous learner, which are other resources that you use with your team?

I do think reading about other people and other people trying to achieve goals at the highest level is really important because there's nothing wrong with imitating how someone goes about being a champion or how someone tries to become the best.

We've read several books with our team. Going all the way back when Lance Armstrong was a cyclist and doing well, obviously before he got into the drug problems.

There's a book called "It's not about the bikes"  I thought that one was really productive.

There's another book called the "Mindful Athlete" by George Mumford, that our team read this one is more about mindset.

Then last year we read a book called "Why the best are the best" by Kevin Eastman.

There's a book that I've read just recently that is called "The obstacle is the way".

I think podcasts, listening to other athletes and other coaches talk about their experiences are all important.

Every season is different, helping out different players, different situations are all about experiences and growing through experiences and learning from experiences.

Whether it's a loss or whether it's a challenging win or whether it's a come back win or going through injury. I think all those experiences are important for the growth of a team and program.

We talked about self-evaluation before...

Self-evaluation is really important. We evaluate our players. We have a system where we evaluate our players on a few categories, team fit, toughness, confidence, dependability, coachability, personal drive, commitment.

And we use five point scale and our players evaluate themselves in those categories, their teammates evaluate them in those categories and the coaches evaluate them in those categories.

We typically will do it, two to three times a year. We're in the middle of doing that, that's part of our meetings right now with our players. We will do it in January for the returning players to evaluate themselves to evaluate the season that we had.

We have a benchmark of where to go from there and then sometimes we'll do it at the end of spring when we have time after our spring training block to give them some information before going into the summer to get ready for the next season.

This one with the last answer are a lot of non tangible or less tangible skills but they make you get better at something.

What advice would you give to a driven young coach about to enter the  “professional coaching world”?

Well, I think sometimes people get into coaching because it's cool and it's fun and you can make a little bit of money and that's the absolute wrong reason to get into coaching.

You get into coaching, because you have a passion for learning and teaching and developing teams and cohesion and culture and those types of things.

It's not just about winning and losing.

And it's not just about because it's cool and it's not just because you like volleyball.

It's more about, do you like to teach? Do you like to see people grow and develop and learn and teams come together and compete for a common goal.

I think the other thing is coaches need to lead themselves.

If you're asking your players to excel at a high level, then you need to lead yourself in a way that exemplifies those things that you're asking them to do.

By taking care of your body, by exercising, by eating well, by treating people right by helping others, having a routine every day in the morning so that you get your day started off in the right direction.

That you're not frantic by the time you get to work and get to the office and practice.

It's important that you need to be level-headed and consistently in the same mind frame, even though behind the scenes, you may not be because of something happened in your personal life or the night before or the day before.

So leading yourself is a really important quality and you can't expect to lead anybody else unless you can lead yourself.

I think too many coaches don't understand what that means.

So learning about what that means is important for young coaches and even veteran coaches, who may have teams that perform in consistently.

Thanks Craig for your availability...

Extra's:

Our US based readers have watched the final match and or know the Kentucky team and their playing style rather well.

Everybody else...you can review the final game below.

Of course a championship winning coach gets thrown in a lot of interviews(as we did ;-)), the one featured below goes a bit more profound into the concepts of coach Skinner and the Kentucky program.

I highlighted 3 clips out of that interview and added some notes that could be of interest to you. All the videos start at the appropriate segment.

(honestly, the entire video has only close to 400 views, but it's packed with great content, technical and tactical, team preparation, athlete and coach mindset...give it a complete listen if you can)

NCAA volleyball national championship game 2020*

First clip:

Notes:

You are what you repeatedly do.

If you want to be good out of system, you have to repeatedly practice out of system in controlled and in live situations.

For a setter the target in and and out of system is different

You have to recognize the difference in targets (pole vs sideline/antenna)

The spikers need to be in a position('attackers angle') that they can hit their shots.

Second clip:

Notes:

I think people can take more chances and run faster systems if they would commit to it. If you play against it, it's really hard to be able to catch up.

Our system is dependent on our players.

A lot of times it's 'speed', we try and run speed a lot, but sometimes you have to adjust.

Third clip:

Notes:

I certainly show intensity and expect a lot.

If they haven't learned in practice how to play the game, they won't learn it from me in those 3 seconds shouting from the sideline.

The most competitive people are the ones who are the most ready, the most often.

Never get to far ahead of the moment, never look back at the last moment. - This is the only moment that has life.

They need to be in tune to what's happening right now.



