===== SESSION: https://volleybrains.com/alan-knipe/ =====

----- VIDEOS -----
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vZbqtTrTZ48
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=f7Igk2usIc4
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XPPrpL5nU7g
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_0oz_9cX2-4
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=w4Fh9MWPbag
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VU8asOpGpUc
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ecL8f9gcCOw
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QCcudS9PW_U
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SBI8rQ7futc
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=l6Qcwtb85OA
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=c7anKarGEUM
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=j6dgz0-XTrA
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=I1-FilxGao0
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=D-kMA9Vnz_A
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lh5H583nJwk
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BOLqgG6hn9U
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WqyvwHue6Eo

----- TEXTO -----
27. Alan Knipe:"Our culture is by design, not by default."

Alan Knipe is the head coach of Long Beach State. The 2018 and 2019 NCAA National Champion. Alan is of course also known as the former head coach of Team USA's men's team (2009-2012). In this masterclass he takes us with on a deep dive into the importance of team culture and accountability.

What we like most about Alan's story is that he's had a broad set of experiences that made him into the coach he is today. From being a college player, to playing 'overseas', to coaching at his Alma Mater, to coaching Team USA and finally getting back to big successes at Long Beach State. During all that time continuously working on his craft.

Even though 'buy-in' and culture will be overarching topics in this masterclass there is so much more that we talked about. How our game should be positioned as a sport, possible tweaks to our rulebook, what style his ultimate starting six should be playing, why his time away from college coaching was fundamental into his current style of coaching and so much more...

There are 17 video clips in this masterclass (15 from our video call) and over 11.000 words.

Take your time getting through all this, split it up if needed. 🙂

You could start with clicking the clip below, that will get you to the press conference minutes after Long Beach State became the 2019 NCAA National Champion and will be a perfect warming up for Alan's entire masterclass.

(our first 2 clips have some sync issues, sound is on point though)

Enter Alan...

Why did you commit to become a professional volleyball coach? What pushed you towards that decision?

Well, I don't ever think that I should've become a coach, to be honest with you. I actually tried probably not to become a coach.

I grew up in a coaching family, not of volleyball, but of soccer actually. So my parents moved to the United States from Northern Ireland in the sixties. And I'm the youngest of three boys. And we were a big, big soccer family.

So my dad coached soccer and started a soccer club. So I was around, you know, coaching a lot. I was the son of a coach. On most of the teams I played on, I was the captain.

And what I didn't realize when I was young, is that I was kind of grooming myself without noticing to probably get into coaching.

When I finished playing, I actually got offered a job coaching at a two year junior college, I had never coached at any level other than coaching some young kids.

So I did that and I really enjoyed it. I did that for two years, we had some pretty good success.

Then the position of assistant coach opened up at the university that I had played at Long Beach State, where I coach obviously now. So I took that job to see if I liked it. And I also took it because it was going back to my school, my Alma Mater and I had passion about that.

I really did enjoy it. And then at that point, really, it just took off.

I don't really think I ever made a decision. And what's funny is I tell people this all the time, I've never really tried to get a coaching job. I've never sought out a job and really applied to go get it without knowing anything about it first.

Most of the time the contact came to me and asked if I was interested in it, whether it was the two year college or the assistant job at Long Beach State or the head coach job at Long Beach State or the USA team.

So I didn't take the normal path that most people did. So I find myself very fortunate to kind of have the upbringing I did and then take advantage of the opportunities that kind of came along.

What advice would you give yourself as a starting coach? An advice that is obvious now, but that you had to develop over the years.

I think going off of kind of the last answer of how I got into coaching, it also put me in a situation where, because I wasn't trying to get into coaching, so I wasn't seeking assistant coaching positions or to be around incredibly high level coaches all the time and maybe have 5 - 6 different experiences with different coaches and mentors.

I feel like I put myself in a situation that I had to work extremely hard to find that help and to find growth and find a way to continually commit to the idea of getting better all the time.

Because I found myself consistently, from a very young age, in the head coaching position.

So because of that, I didn't have a tremendous amount of mentors around me. I had to go out and search for them.

So my advice would be; Sometimes the quickest route to the head coaching jobs is not necessarily the best route.

The best route is being around the best coaches and the best programs and culture you can immerse yourself with and really invest in relationships. Good coaches, good people, good organizations and learn why they're good.  Without having to be the person, making the call all the time at the top. Because a lot of times you learn, not only what's the good, but a lot of times you learn things that you would never do.

If you're a smart young coach and you're on a staff, you're not going to agree with everything every head coach does or how he handles a player, he handles a situation.

But you learn from different coaches, what you like and what you don't like. And that's how you kind of build your toolbox as a coach.

So I would push two things.

Spend as much time around the best coaches and the best organizations you can be part of.

And the other one is be a constant learner and find ways to get better...

whether it's investing in professional growth opportunities, even like what we're doing today, listen to some of these interviews and being part of conventions and coaching clinics.

But also finding time to read, there's lots of great books out there by wonderful people, whether it be coaching or leadership or biomechanics, but constantly find time within a day, within a week, within a month, within a year that you're going to set time aside to try to continue to grow.

Because too many young coaches, specially that were good players, know it all too early. At least they think they do.

And they have to learn the valuable lessons as they go along, but they really don't and they have to kind of learn to learn. They need to open themselves up, kind of let the ego go.

Especially if you were a good player and understand that coaching is very different; open yourself up to the idea that you probably don't know nearly as much as you think you do.

And I think it will be a much smoother introduction into the coaching world than maybe some have.

The former pro or superstar athlete that becomes a coach and all steps involved or needed is for sure something that already came up in other articles we made.

It's a very difficult thing sometimes for the exceptional player, to be able to relate to the ordinary athlete.

So you brought up TJ. (Volleybrains: in our talk before the interview)

So I'll use TJ as an example. One of the best things about TJ is not, you know, you could look at his arm, you can look at all the things that he can do on the volleyball court. But one of the real special things about TJ and a lot of really special players is his ability to read the game faster and anticipate what's going to happen quicker and process the information quicker than most players do.

And from a very young age, in our program, he was able to do that.

Reading what was about to happen next, just because the opposite passed the ball close to the 10 foot line, he's not going to be available or the bic hitter is out because he moved to his right and he's not able to get into his pattern and hit a bic or what it might be.

You know, really, really early on those things were glaringly obvious to TJ. And so  when you are that special, as an athlete, and you have that ability to process information very fast and apply it to the game, it's very difficult then to become a coach and ask why your players don't understand what was very easy for you to understand.

I gotta imagine Karch went through the same thing, obviously, he's done a tremendous job coaching our women's national team. But he spent a lot of time not coaching and he was a little bit older when he came back to get into coaching.

So I just wonder what it would have been like for Karch, if he had started to coach, as soon as he retired. Would he have had the same patience level that you see him have today?

I think he probably would. Because what I do know about Karch is he's an exceptional committed coach OR was that also as an athlete. If he's going to do it, he's going to give a hundred percent and he's going to be very good at it. Cause he's going to make himself be good at it.

But my point is when you come out of being an exceptional player, I think it's very difficult to understand the common player. And most of our players are not on the exceptional side of reading the game or even with their size or athleticism. A lot of them fit into that 80% of the group.

So I think it's a very difficult part of the game.

And players, I don't care if you're Karch or TJ, whoever you want to say. All players who finished playing and start coaching, you're almost coaching your team, like you're their captain, or as you said, the player coach, which is never good in the long run.

Cause you're very emotional based. You're not tactical, you're not level headed. It's not where you're showing composure to your players, because you're reacting a lot of the time as a current player, as a captain would.

And I found myself doing that for years. I acted very much like a captain when I was a young coach.

And I feel like... maybe it's just cause I'm older now, but I think that everything slows down a little bit and you get away from those days that everything's so emotional and physical and it becomes more cerebral and forward thinking. The process of the big picture.

You have a tough time seeing the process when you're a young captain.

Do you have a particular goal as a coach? Maybe a goal that you already reached or a goal that is so hard to reach that it gives you daily motivation?

I kind of divide my coaching career in college into kind of two equal halves. Cause I coached Long Beach for nine years before I took over the USA team for the London Olympics.

And then I came back and I think it's roughly about the same amount of time, nine and 10 years, something like that. I think that when you have time to step away from something, because what I really knew about college volleyball was everything about Long Beach. I had played here. I had been the assistant coach and the head coach and having those, those four years to step away was really good for me in a lot of ways to be able to have a different perspective of the game.

Of course I was coaching in a very different format in the international world, being around some of the best players in the world, the best coaches in the world.

And then most importantly, having some time in the off season during the professional season where I wasn't coaching. And I was prepping for the year and prepping for my team and prepping for our culture and prepping for things that I wanted to work on when they came back from Europe, of course, there were trips to Europe to connect with the guys, but I still had a decent amount of time just to work on my craft.

And that was a really reinvigorating part of the job to really work on myself as a coach and what I really believe in.

Putting things down on paper, because I'm a big believer that, if you can't put it down on paper, then how are you ever going to be able to explain it to a player in enough detail for him to actually execute it in big matches?

So spending lots of times with what I really believed in and trying to get away from being vague on things, systems, individual technique, offensive systems, defensive systems, serving philosophies, I really put down what I believed in, what I really was trying to coach.

Then I was able to come back to Long Beach and being gone for four years means pretty much, everybody in the program is new.

There was very little carry over, for many of the guys that were still there. So it was almost like starting fresh again, like going to a new college, not just Long Beach State, because there remained very little connection.

There were a lot of things that I tried to do different on purpose and it's been obviously successful. There's been a lot of things that we've been able to accomplish.

So I guess why I bring this up, and it's kind of a long answer, is, when I played at Long Beach and I was originally assistant coaching, we were a good team, meaning different years at different times, we had teams that could compete for championships.

But sustainable success was very difficult for lots of reasons.

The funding model wasn't very good. The pay for the coaches, even the amount of full-time coaches we had, there were a lot of things holding us back in those days.

I was able to get movement with the administration and with the campus to buy into the vision.

And they did that. We've been getting better with their support. And I think it also helped that I had a more clear cut plan from my side.

So I think that the ultimate goal is, to finish my time at Long Beach and finish my goals that I have here, to button up all of the things that I think are necessary to have long-term sustainable success, not only on the court, but in the classroom, recruiting, fundraising, alumni, branding of our game.

You need all the different components that we think are important and I want to leave this package for the next head coach that it's ready to continue to grow.

Because this was kind of my baby from the very beginning, because as a player back when I played in the early nineties, it were very limited funds and it didn't feel like big time, college sports.

Most of the season you played in small gyms with little crowds and not a lot of travel and not a lot of money to help anything and that's changed tremendously.

So that's my goal.

I have other things in my life I would still like to accomplish outside of volleyball.

I owe a lot to my family and my wife, why not go back and maybe visit some countries and actually see them instead of just see a hotel or a gym.

So there's some things, you know, lifetime things that I want to do or life experience things that I still want to accomplish.

But that's where I'm at right now. My mind is set around finishing this model that I'm trying to build at Long Beach State.

You touched upon the team culture, let's talk a bit more about what you're instilling with your team, with your players.

We spend a tremendous time on our culture. The really enjoyable part of being a college coach in the men's game is that our season starts in January and you get your team in in August.

So you can spend that entire fall academic semester of building your team, both as athletes in the strength and conditioning and in the weight room. And also in what we call our "retreat" that we have every Monday of the entire fall semester, where we're spending time on what we believe in.

And there's lots of levels to that.

Obviously we can talk about our blocking and our defense and all the technical parts of the game, but there's also things that are super important about our culture.

Because I'm a big believer, if you go back to what I said earlier about sustainable success, then you have to make sure that your culture is by design, not default.

The culture that I played in as a player here, albeit that it turned into a national championship and some very, very good teams. And I loved my time here.

But it was very much by default at that time. We had a very good collection of players, some very good coaches at the time. And then from year to year, it could change dramatically. So it was a little bit up and down, but the bad part about that is really quickly, if you're not careful, the culture by default can go bad in a heartbeat to.

The wrong coach, the wrong players, not enough attention to the behavior within the locker room within the classroom, how they interact off the court with one another. There's lots of different things that can change it.

So you have to be able to address these early things that will come up, not if they come up.

Especially in this age of social media, where people can disappear from reality and just communicate with their thumbs all day. That becomes a little bit of a problem later on in life when they have to work within a unit with a team and they have to be able to communicate with the coaching staff...

So teaching them communication and teaching them how to be open and honest with their communication and direct with one another so that we can get buy-in. If a team doesn't have good communication and they don't trust the fact that they can communicate with one another, they can communicate with their coaches...you're going to have players that are silenced and when they're silenced, there's not going to be buying into what you're trying to do.

And if you don't have buy-in, you're not going to get to the level of having any trust with one another. And obviously trust, as we all know, is an enormous part of team success.

Trusting to make the right play on the court, trusting that they'll make the right decision on Saturday night, trusting that they'll do what they're supposed to do academically to still be able to play.

Lots of trust is broken by the fact that communication hasn't been established as a foundation. And once you get the trust, and once you develop the trust with one another, you can now hold each other accountable.

Because you trust that the other teammate and the other coach or your head coach, or whoever it might be is totally invested into this culture and is communicating each step of the way and building trust each step of the way.

You're going to be more apt to trust that when he talks to you about accountability, like even volleyball related: 'Hey, that tip was yours. You have to get it.' Or I'm asking you to do this offensively or set this kind of offense as a setter.

You trust him more when you've had good open communication and lots of contacts. And then now the accountability to holding yourself to the level of what the coach wants or what the players want, or your teammates want is easier for everybody because of the trust.

And once you have the communication and the trust and the accountability. Now we can start getting to the point of getting the results that we all wanted from the very beginning.

So we spent a lot of time talking about our culture being by design being intentional. And once again, going back to the idea of being able to write it down, we use kind of like, in a corporate world, a job description.

Everybody has a job description, but in a team, there is no such thing, even though we imply there is. So what we do a lot is we'll take our team and we'll divide it by position. And after we're deep into our retreat, we'll have the outside hitters get together and the opposites get together and everybody...the groups, get together and write their job description.

What does it means to be an outside hitter in our program? On blocking on defense on, on our offense, serving whatever, all the different areas and what they're going to commit to doing. And they have to actually present that job description to the group as a group, they all get a piece of it and they all explain it to the group.

And what they're saying to the group is they're saying: "this is what we're going to do." So we're stating it, we're writing it down. And then we're asking you to hold us accountable to this. And it's okay for you to hold us accountable because we're telling you, we know this is important.

And we do this, this drill where everybody, each group does this back and forth to each other to build that accountability, so we can get to the results.

So I guess to kind of take it into one line or one bullet point of information that I would say about culture is...

Culture is everything about your team and it takes time and it takes effort and we choose culture by design over default.

I appreciate how you in a way systemised the creation of your team culture. Without being intentional about it, without really having it front of mind, you won't be able to instil the level of accountability that you are actively creating.

On accountability...in our article with Tommi Tiilikainen (coaching in South Korea now) he explained us how his players are presenting the team video to each other. How do you guys set that up?

We have a very interactive video. We don't preach at them. We write in bullets, not in paragraphs. So we just want little bullets.

Before we give them the scouting report, they watch their own video and give us their thoughts.

Our players all send us their bullets, three bullets on both sides, offense and defense.

And then we try to find as many of those that we believe in to put into the scouting report so they can see their bullets within our plan so that they had part of planning it.

That brings us seamlessly to the next question. When preparing a game (next weekend), how does your general approach look like and did you ever change your approach to get to the one that you are using today?

We're connected with Volleymetrics and now HUDL so our guys will all watch.

They do a really good job of watching. And then what we do is we put them in small groups and we bring them in and watch with our outsides or watch with our middles. So that the other guys don't have to waste time, a part of that is time management, in the NCAA you have only so much time you can spend with the players, so you have to be really efficient with it. But more importantly to have their full attention.

So we do the small groups and then we'll tie that altogether in one session later on, but we're really efficient with it, like twenty-five minutes, total.

The passers will talk about the other team's servers, our middle blockers and pins will talk about, the other attackers, their tendencies. And the coaches, then talk about the themes of what the opponent likes to do and what we would like to do.

We call them our flexes. What part of our defense or our offense that we want to flex more in this match. Because maybe we didn't need it as much in the last match.

So obviously a team that likes to commit with their middle blocker, then it may be a flex and we make sure we're going to be passing well enough. And we're going to want to establish a lot of area six, you know, if they're going to commit the whole time...whatever that might be a flex.

That's totally different on a team that's just going to read block the entire time against us.

But we try not to worry too much about our opponent. We keep it very basic. But very precise on what we believe.

One of the problems I think coaches make all the time is that they spend so much time, with good intention, watching lots of video and lots of statistics, but maybe a small sample size that maybe isn't enough information to make some of these claims and then they give all the information they know to their players and overwhelm the players with a six page scouting report, one page on every rotation.

And I just believe that we have to be very factual with we're given, if we're going to make it an absolute, that we really believe this because it's a trust factor with our team.

If we tell them this is going to happen and we go out there and it consistently doesn't happen, our scouting reports don't have any value later on in big matches. So I would rather give them less and make adjustments as the season goes on and add a few, but still not get really, really long.

Let's just pick the most important pieces and then spend most of the time talking about the things that we're good at, that we're going to be good at and the adjustments we can make if we have to in the match.

It's more on our side of the net. You know, an old coach that I was around way back in my first couple of years coaching junior college used to say: "the only thing that matters in coaching is to keep your own front porch clean."

It's not the only thing that matters, but we spent a great amount of time on us.

But you were asking about the preparation, when I was in high school in the States, I also played American football and I only played a small amount of it, but I have a decent understanding of what was happening within the coaching ranks of what they were trying to do with us and then watching it in the professional and the college ranks here in United States.

The one thing I like a lot about what football does is they're very routined in what the week's gonna look like. And their players know after getting beat up very badly over the weekend, they know they're going to come in on a Monday and it's not going to be a real physical practice, but it's going to be video and recovery.

I've gotten very routined in my week of what a Monday looks like and what a Tuesday and what a Wednesday looks like once we get out of all this training that we're in right now and we get into our season and I think it's mentally comforting to the players to kind of know what the day is going to feel like.

And yes, there might be some value to shock them every once in a while and say, we're going to compete. But I feel like the level is so high that we're playing in right now. And we tend to play Friday and then Saturday night back to back. And because we use the international rules that we only have the six subs, you have a small group of guys that carry the load for your group and they're physically beat up.

So having the recovery day and then building into days that are very technical, but kind of heavy on Tuesday, Wednesday, and then very light, in time, but efficient, game like, quick, warm up and go on a Thursday.

And then mixing in the video throughout the week at the same times and at the same time that we expect their video to come in.

I think it's very comforting for the players to get into a really, really good rhythm.

And it's easier since our schedule has changed into a Friday and Saturday when I was first coaching, we used to play on Tuesdays and sometimes Thursdays and on a Saturday, and it was difficult to set up your week.

So that's probably the biggest change that I've made over the last 10 years.

The very structured approach to the week and modeled very much after American football.

You put a big the emphasis on the accountability and buy-in. But with the structure comes that it could be easy for your players to abuse the trust and make some bad decisions, because they know...tomorrow will be a recovery day for example.(devil's advocate here)

Yeah. They could make some bad decisions knowing if we're not going to practice hard the next day. But I think our guys are so appreciative of knowing what's going to happen, that they use it.

They're smart. They know the days that they have to get rest and they know the days they're going to come in and work hard.

I think on a day that you know that you're not going to have to compete real hard and it's not going to be physically taxing. It just helps your recovery for the week because you're not coming in, geared up for that day.

I believe there's only so many days in a week that you can be on edge and be at that high, high level ready to compete and you have to be careful to protect that time.

One thing that we deal with a lot here in the United States, especially in the men's game is that our ultimate boss in an athletic department is called an athletic director.

And the athletic director very rarely has any idea what men's volleyball is about.

Now. Our current athletic director right now definitely understands, and he's very supportive, but historically that's not the case.

I had a particular athletic director once that came to watch our game. And he made us kind of a snide comment about it, but in a funny way. He said: "I don't understand volleyball. You guys warm up longer than you play matches. Like your warmup takes longer than the game itself. And then in between games, the players that are playing are playing pepper, and they have to hit more balls in between games."

And this is the college game here. Obviously this doesn't happen internationally as much, where the warmups are shorter. But the women and the men in college sometimes warm up for an hour and half an hour and 45 minutes before they play a game. So, what I've done is shorten that up very much for our side.

We don't use most of the time that we're allowed because we shortened it all up.

All for the same reason. You don't want your guys emotionally invested in a match two hours before the match.

And if you're going to ask them to be like that every day, all week long, it's very difficult to have the buildup to the match that you can fully invest into the competition.

So I'm very protective of, especially as it gets late in the season, how many times in a week we're asking them to get up to full competition mode and burn that energy.

Burn all that energy, emotion and passion and physicality that they're putting in a practice and then asking them to use that again on a Saturday and a Sunday when we've been doing this now for four or five months, that's not a bright idea.

So I'm real protective of that.

And that's something I probably wasn't very good at when I was young, because you needed to get a three hour practice every day and you had to get every rep in. And by the end of the week, they were out of gas.

Let's dig into the technical side of the game. What are some rules that could make our game more attractive? What is something that you see that could be beneficial to our game if we added it to the rulebook.

Yeah. It's a tough question in the sense that I'm a very old purist on the fact of how I like the game.

I know I'm really dating myself when I say I like side out scoring.

I like side-out scoring, not because it was just what I did and what I was comfortable with as a player. But I liked it because very rarely did the best team not win in a season or in a match. And I liked that.

I think rally scoring has given the team that's not as good, the opportunity to win for the obvious reasons that the real point scoring is so low compared to what it was in side out scoring.

I go back and forth on what I like. But I certainly like the excitement of the rally scoring and it's very easy for the non volleyball enthusiasts to understand, you get a point every time you win the rally.

And then when you talk about changes, the men's game and the women's game is so different and you have, in the United States, such a big following for women's volleyball. It's very difficult for them to carry over and watch the men's game and see the service errors and the "pass, set, hit, kill" without the rally back and forth.

So you have to decide, is that important?

Is it important to appease the crowd or is it important for us to expose our crowd to men's volleyball and have a better appreciation for the athleticism that it takes to play the men's game?

So when I hear people say: "I think we should move the three meter line back or we should raise the net"... or whatever it might be to try to create longer rallies in the men's game. I don't like that at all. I really like the game. I like the court we have, I like the size.

The Americans tend not to be the biggest players in the world. Obviously the net thing becomes something maybe the Russians could deal a little easier with.

But I think for most of the world the net is the right size. So I wouldn't mess with that.

But the game itself on the men's game, I think the biggest gripe or struggle for most people over here is just the amount of accepted errors from the end line from serving.

As far as can you receive a serve with your hands?

Obviously right before the Olympics, they were trying to change the, what I will call the Kubiak rule, where he got so good at his secondary shots that the committee is trying to change that.

Those things are debatable and those are fine tuned things that most people don't even really understand.

I don't think the overhand serve receive helped the game a whole lot, cause it took one of the most difficult parts of the game and watered it down. So I think that from a beauty standpoint or for people appreciating the game I'm not a huge fan of that. But I think scoring is okay.

I think some of the things that they constantly talk about trying to change and this is where I finally am going to get to my answer on this.

Is that I don't like the fact that we want to constantly change our game. The argument that we can't get volleyball on TV in the United States, because you don't know how long it's going to last...Tennis has been on TV forever and they haven't changed very much to their game.

Wimbledon, the French open, the US open. These are very popular and people understand them. And there's been tradition with that.

So I guess my answer is not a cop out, but I'm a traditionalist of the game. And I would like to not change as much.

Can we tweak things? Yes. But I think we have a pretty good product and we should do a better job at the FIVB level, the collegiate level and all the club levels to promote our game and educate people about our game, bring people to our game and have people appreciate our game. Instead of trying to make our game become soccer or basketball and put it in four quarters and have a running score.

We don't have to be them, but nobody's going to tell our story for us as a sport. We have to be the narrator of our sport. So we have to do a better job of explaining why our sport is right and the rules are right. And the style of the game is beautiful so that people understand it.

I don't think we need to dumb down our game so the person who comes to a game once a year understands it. Maybe he needs to come more often than once a year. And he needs to invest in our sport if he really is a big fan of it.

I'll be the first to say, there's a lot of things about tennis. I still don't fully understand, but I'm not gonna tell them they should change their rules. So I have a better understanding. Or cricket or for you probably baseball, like they're not going to change their games, but when you become a fan of it and you invest in it, you understand it.

So those are just some of my general thoughts.

I can really appreciate the overall service error issue. So if there's a fix on that, after a certain amount of service errors within a set, there's a penalty for example. If people want to talk about something like that, I guess I could listen to some of those conversations, but I think most of it comes down to the coach itself.

I coach a brand of volleyball that I hope is very appeasing to our fan base that comes to watch. Because yes, we miss serves and we miss more than our women's team would miss. But very rarely do I hear that we're just reckless with our serving or it's too much to watch.

That's a long answer. I don't know if I got detailed enough for you, to what I would want to change. But these are my thoughts.

This brings me back to my prep work for this call, I saw a clip where you mentioned that 'maybe men's volleyball is America's best kept secret'. Which sums up what you just said. Let's find a way to educate the fanbase...

A small 'rule book' tweak that stayed in the back of my mind, from an interview (with Anders Kristiansson, that still has to be posted) was 'just' to keep the rally point system, but have the last point of the set be a side out only point.

Which in and of itself could have a massive impact on the gameplay. But there needs to be a time and place to test this out of course...

And I think there's some validity. We've messed with some things like that here, of putting the freeze on at different points of the game. Back in the day when I was still playing we had a pro league here in the United States called Team Cup. I don't know if you've ever seen it.

You should search for 'Team Cup at the Forum' where the Lakers used to play. It was all in the late eighties and early nineties. And it was a really unique format. You should watch it because I know how much you're into volleyball. You would want to do something on this.

So what would happen is that they move the three meter line back. It was now right in the middle of the court. So it was 15 feet from the net. And you were allowed to have four blockers if you wanted. So the other middle blocker would serve and run up or you'd have two middle blockers, but only the one that was in the front row could attack in transition.

So you've got to figure out in trans, which middle blocker was front row, but you got to still stay your side-out in rotation. But you had a freeze. It was to 30 points I believe. And I think the freeze was at 28 and then it was side out scoring.

And if you go back and watch it...like Karch was playing, Steve Timmons was playing, Craig Buck, Bob Ctvrtlik all the American players and some of the younger ones like us, but they also had the beach players out there. So you had Sinjin Smith and Randy Stoklos. And one year they brought Il Messaggero over and they played in it. Also Jose Loyola and these guys all played in it.

And it was wonderful, but they had the freeze and it was really entertaining. If you're interested in of what rules could happen, watch the game and see what you think about the three meter line being moved back. And the fourth blocker, because killing a ball was really difficult.

And if there's going to be a way to control, you know, a well passed ball with all the attackers and especially now with how aggressive the area six play is around the world. Your teams are siding out at 80% on a good pass.

So that fourth blocker neutralizes that a little bit. I'm not necessarily advocating that I have to have a fourth blocker, but it's definitely an answer to it. It's very difficult to kill the ball in that situation.

I don't think I would move the three meter line back. I think I would leave it where it is, but the fourth locker is something that I have never heard since that league and that actually makes it pretty enjoyable.

It's a totally different game now and it would freak everybody out. But it's not a philosophy I'm dreaming up here.

So look for 'Team Cup at The Forum', 'team Coca-Cola', 'team Paul Mitchell'.

And see what you think of some of these games. I think you'll be entertained.

(Volleybrains: I was, check out a screenshot of the scoring system and some action down below)

The current FIVB calendar makes it very difficult to find opportunities to 'test things out'.

Then again, they can also not just flip the script, decent testing and validation is needed. Former Serena Williams' head coach, Patrick Mouratoglou created a non-WTA live streaming tournament in 2020 in an attempt to test new concepts.

Getting a few current volleyball superstars together, get a couple of sponsors, a venue and test what you want to test...

That's exactly what Team Cup was. The reason why Team Cup was successful is because Steve Timmons at the time was married to Jeanie Buss (Jeanie Buss owns the Lakers now)

And so at the time her dad owned the Lakers and they also owned the building.

They told all the sponsors that if you want to sponsor the Lakers, you have to sponsor Team Cup volleyball. And that's how they got the prize money and the floor and the TV contracts and everything they needed.

But bringing those superstars together is always good.

So I think a format like Team Cup would work and it doesn't have to only be a US thing. It was mostly us, but there were some foreign players. It could definitely be a global thing and it could be two weekends for example.

But you could mess with the scoring system and people are going to watch because the best players in the world are going to be there.

And those guys love to play together. Look at all the guys that go to the NBA All Star Weekend and stuff like that.

The game is not as important as it is to play together with the other best players in the world. And we don't do that as a sport very often.

For sure, so this is a call out to the FIVB and for sure to volleyballworld.tv to give us some of that private equity money and come up with something. 😉

Talking about the best players around. If you can make the strongest 'starting six' in the world, past and/or present. What would your team look like? You can answer in whichever way you like.

Yeah that's a really difficult question because I'm a big believer that the game is so different now.

And we have to get out of the past and we have to coach in the present. We have to let our athletes be athletes and we have to adapt.

And when I say that, the reason why that's important is because thinking back to some of the great players, even the Karches or others in that era in the eighties or the early nineties teams you see them playing the game as it was then.

You also know that if Karch was able to play today's game, he would be tremendous at the bic and all of the fast sets, he would be great at that.

But it's hard to pick and choose from different generations to pick a team. I just think that to pick six guys is incredibly difficult.

What I would do...I don't know if I can pick the lineup that I would want, based off like an all-star approach.

I know the style of volleyball that I would want to teach and run. With tempo and a lot of athleticism. And not getting so big that we couldn't defend and pass and transition.

So that takes you down the path then of naming players like Giba, who I'm a huge fan of or Karch.

I tend to lean towards that very athletic and very well-developed all around volleyball player who can do all things on the court for you and not just get monstrous. Like maybe we did in the early nineties where guys weren't great passers, but they were huge and we'd have these huge guys on the outside.

I loved a guy like David Lee, for example. Not just because he played for me at Long Beach or the national team. But David was one of the most enjoyable players to coach when it came to just read blocking. And then you look at guys like the size of Muserskiy or Mikhailov what they are able to do.

I'm a huge fan of what Ricardo did when he was setting for Brazil. I think that what they did with Dante and Ricardo, that whole group of Brazilians with Bernardino coaching, what they did to develop the area six attack that completely revolutionized our game. I would have to put some of those players in there.

I'm going to want Clay Stanley to serve as many times as he can on my team. I'm going to tell you that.

Matt Anderson is a player that's always going to be in all those conversations from the American side but I would want him on the left. And I know Matt would say, I want to be on the left.

I would want Sergio to be a libero, I think that he's just tremendous.

You look at what Marouf's done for Iran. There are so many things that the world's trying to chase them with right now, the athleticism, some of the routes the middles run, it's not just front tight, quick or a gap. His ability to set the ball and be able to have deception of his offense.

So I'm not really sure if I'm putting a team on the court yet. I think I've gotten some names out there.

I would build out my team to be able to play with speed. I would want to be able to defend in transition. I'd want to have really good arms. If you think about the arms you're putting on the floor, meaning their ability to change speeds from the end line and have different shots at the net and be able to change their, just their game, depending on what is needed.

In transition I'd like to play fast, but at the same time, when a team is serving well against us, we need to be comfortable, not being able to be as fast and be able to play big ball.

I haven't had a ton of time to prep with that answer as far as where I would go with it, but there's obviously a tremendous amount of players I didn't think about. I'm leaving off pretty much everybody from Italy but they dominated especially in those early nineties and late eighties teams.

Zaytsev's serve obviously that was a big deal for us, when I coached the Olympic team, he had a tremendous match serving against us.

I like the athleticism. I like the speed of the game. I like all-round volleyball. And I like the high volleyball IQ guys.

And I think that my dream team would be able to play the game with great control of the ball, be able to play fast, but if needed, be able to play big.

If you could have a gigantic billboard anywhere with anything on it — metaphorically speaking, getting a message out to every athlete on the globe — what would it say and why?

Well, there's a lot of things that would stand out to me, but I think that if I was trying to make something generic to fit for everybody. I would say, choose determination over frustration.

So what that means to me is: emotion is very real. We all feel it as coaches and we feel it as players. And it's going to play out in our game, whether we like it or not.

And it's gonna manifest usually into frustration, which leads to you being in the last point, the last play, mad at yourself, mad at the coach, mad at the referee, mad at whoever.

Whereas determination is a choice of what you're going to do next. So you're letting the last play go and you're planning on what you're going to do to pass the next ball and who you're going to set next. The ref doesn't matter. And I have to block a ball or we have to just win this point, whatever it might be.

So I would literally write it up as as a fraction and just put it up as determination over frustration.

Do you have certain habits, things that you do to prepare yourself for the game?

I don't have a lot, there's a couple of things that I would say that's personal about my coaching that I do that maybe people don't see.

And one would be, I try to be highly prepared at the beginning of the week. So my work is done and I'm coaching my team and I'm into the mindset of the week and not trying to research information about opponents or practice planning during the week.

That it's all done and doesn't lead into my game day preparation. I'm very routined with that, even of how I put together my notes and how I put everything together into my folder. I need every piece of information that I feel is important for a game, from our reports, I need it in the same page, the same way every time whether I use it or not, I need to know exactly where to go.

I'm very routined with that.

Every game day we get together and we'll watch a very short amount of video and we'll do an activation and some serve and pass. The whole thing would take maybe an hour.

And after that's over in the morning, I think it's very important for me to get away from the office and get away from the gym and get away from my team and maybe go get something to eat, work out. I don't work out nearly as many times as I should. A lot of times it's actually even go lay down, just to take your mind off it.

Once again, going back to what I said earlier about not trying to stay so on all the time, wired for the game.

I try really hard on that game day to take a big chunk of the day and be away from the game. And be able to come in totally energized physically and emotionally for the match.

So I don't think people probably see that side of me very often. Of course they're not privy to the inside. But I think that taking some time for yourself, calm down and be away from it, not overly bound up, makes me a better coach for my players. And when I come in with that demeanor, my coaching during the match tends to be a lot calmer and more thoughtful and intentful instead of emotional, energized, yelling, screaming, you know, kind of being a captain.

But because I was that captain kind of guy for so long, I have to find times to literally separate myself from it, to put myself in 'coaching of the match' mode of how I want my team to play. And as we all know the teams take on the personality of their head coaches a lot, at least they should, there should be a number of things that they follow, if you're doing your job.

I want my composure to be composed and I want it to be confident and I want it to be prepared and I don't want it to ever feel like, last minute my player sees me running around trying to put a scouting report together or:'oh, I forgot to tell you this.' or 'Hey, we got a new clip, a video that we didn't see all week we want you to see.'

We're not going to do any of that stuff.

We're going to prep and we're going to be ready to go take our side of the net. And even on our non-verbal presentation, we're going to bring into our gym confidence and preparation.

The work is already done. Let's go out and execute.

In the last five years, what new belief, behaviour, or habit did you implement and how did it improve your life or your coaching?

Yeah, I think it's probably more than five years.

I think it's probably the 10 year window for me. And that is how often can I use the word 'love' with my players. And mean it, how can I show it and not just say it, but show it in my actions and in my communications and in my individual communication with them, one-on-one away from volleyball about their life, about their family, about their graduation, about trying to go, maybe play professionally when they're done. About the fact that they start or they don't start, or they had a good match or a bad match.

Showing how much I love them. And I truly do, I love this program and I love all the guys that have come through it, but being intentful about using that word and literally saying that as a head coach, as a father figure to them, letting them know that they're loved by me and my staff and each other.

And in that last 10 year window, that word gets used all the time in our program back to whether it be in a message, a text or in a meeting with our guys. Them saying that back to the coaches, knowing how much investment has went in and how much they appreciate and how grateful they are using that word back to their staff and to their teammates.

And I think it's been a huge shift in the culture that we're not trying to be just a volleyball machine.

We're trying to be understanding that these are all humans going through real life things. And I think coronavirus has very much highlighted that when we were doing the Zooms and when we got the opportunity to come back in person, how much that love did matter and how much they yearn for more of it.

And they weren't getting it when they were forced to be away from each other and how special the program was because there is so much love in it and how much they missed it.

The short answer is using and showing the word love on a regular basis through our actions and our words.

Every coaching situation is different and lends itself less or more to become a mentor/teacher for these young grown-ups.

The upside is so huge though that there is no reason not to invest into these interpersonal connections with your players. All the things that you learn them are things that they'll have to learn sooner or later, why not sooner...

We spend a lot more time with our guys than the professional teams get to spend with their guys, or even the national team get to spend with their guys.

In a calendar year and on a daily basis, we get to be with them a lot. And we get them at that very vulnerable years of 18 to 22 years old.

We say all the time, we want our players to expect greatness in all areas of their life. That doesn't mean perfection, but expect greatness and push themselves as an athlete, as a person, as a friend, as a teammate, as a spouse, as a son, as somebody representing our university as our community and continue to let them understand that it doesn't happen randomly.

It's something that they have to work at. It's something they have to apply themselves to. And it's not always perfect.

One of the most rewarding parts of this whole job is watching players after they're done, get married and get jobs and come back to our alumni events and how many times they use what they learned in the program, in their current profession, and then how grateful they are.

And we have a mentoring program within our program where our alumni will meet with our current players and share information about their field of profession or how they got to Europe or whatever it might be.

And listening to those Zooms and listening to the former players talk about their foundation, that it was set in the years that they played volleyball at Long Beach State. About how to go into the business world, not just the volleyball world.

And I think that's an important piece, a very important piece of what we do as college volleyball coaches, that it's not just a professional volleyball career in the future. We're talking about their life. We're talking about their profession, we're talking about something that's going to greatly impact their lives and their earning potential for the rest of their life.

I'm curious by your approach of coping with setbacks, what do you do when your team gets overwhelmed, or when you feel unfocused.

I think in life and in coaching there's lessons to be learned in every situation. Unfortunately, we tend to learn our lessons, when the result doesn't go the way we want in life or in competition.

I think if you can find ways to constantly learn, the lessons that are out there, even after a win in volleyball or after something that's going well for you and your career or your life. That you can always get better, there's always areas of growth.

I tell our players all the time that if you use the example of a really great volleyball match that comes down to a deuce set in the fifth, and really you can win that match and you can lose that match, maybe you even got nothing to do with it. A team gets a bad call at 14 all, the opposing team goes back and serves a let serve ace. And all of a sudden you lost. And the other team won.

And all of a sudden the emotions go super high, both directions. The losing team is really mad. The coach is throwing things, kicking things over and everyone's emotional. And for sure that practice the next Monday is going to be great, cause you lost.

And then the other side, it can be over the top. Congratulatory, celebrating, we've made it, we're the greatest team ever and all the great decisions that were made and how great are we as players... and maybe their practice on Monday isn't as good because everyone's telling them how great they are when really the match was almost a tie.

So I find that I use that example for our guys all the time, we have to find ways to come in on Monday, regardless of which way it went in the fifth set and get better. Individualy and collectively, we have to get 1%, 2% better each day we're together as a team. And if we do that, we'll get significantly better by our next match.

If you take that philosophy into your life as a coach, when you're overwhelmed with your schedule or your travel or you got a couple of key injuries. You've lost some matches. All sorts of different scenarios that can stress you as a coach. But you have to try to take out the things that are most important and the things that you have control over and not get caught up in the things you have no control over.

And literally I'm a big list guy. I'm going to put it down. I'm going to write it and I'm going to state it. After a tough loss or a couple of tough losses or good wins. To bring myself back to focus after either one of them, I have to write it all down. I have to define it.

I have a big whiteboard up in practice every day. And on a Monday. I force myself. I tell my team, I'm always going to put those things on the board. And I do that for two reasons.

One, I want them to see it, but two, I want to hold myself accountable that I told them every Monday I'm going to put them up there. So I can't come in and say, I was so mad after the game on Saturday I haven't had time to think about it. So it holds me accountable.

So I guess my answer is, if we can have the same attitude about lessons learned after good things that happen and good results that happen to still find a way to get a little bit better. Then it helps offset when things are tough also because you have a roadmap to how you're going to approach life and how you're going to approach a week or a month or a season or a good time or a bad time.

And then what your players get out of that for you and hopefully the people that work around you, is that you have a very level headed, very thoughtful approach to how you do things and less emotional and reactive to the situation.



