===== SESSION: https://volleybrains.com/michal-winiarski-1/ =====

----- VIDEOS -----
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=A-2xGhp-FeI
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qzyu5rMVgPE
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YY5Tb47BNp8
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Y3RZ3j3niaU

----- TEXTO -----
28. Michal Winiarski:"I have the same attitude towards coaching as I had towards playing, I want to be the best I can be."

Michal became a volleyball coach after a long and successful playing career. He's the former captain of the Polish National team, 2014 World Champion, 2012 World League winner, 2009 Champions League winner, Italian Champion with the team of Trentino and won multiple Polish Championships and Cups.

All of that combined with numerous individual awards and to be considered one of the best outside hitters in the world in the 2007-2014 period. (I'm eyeballing that period a bit, but I got a close look, pretty sure of these dates 👍)

Since 4 years Michal is working hard to become an expert volleyball coach. Currently he's coaching the Polish club team of Trefl Gdansk.

Michal is for sure an example of somebody who's investing time and effort into making a successful transition into the 'coaching field'.

Michal, what pushed you towards becoming a volleyball coach?

It was an entire process. When I was a player, a young player, let's say til I was 25 years of age, I just loved to play volleyball. And it was amazing, I just had to think about how to be the very best player that I could be, how to help the team, how to improve as a player and a person and everything was 'easy'.

Growing a bit older I started to have more injuries and I understood that I wouldn't play volleyball all my life.

When I became 30 years old, I thought to myself:' okay, now try to start to develop yourself as a coach, keep your eyes open, try to learn from your head coaches.' But all and all I thought that I had got it figured out.(laughs at himself thinking of that period)

I became the assistant coach of Roberto Piazza in our team in Belchatow, where I had played for a lot of years.

And my own belief or concept was that, okay, I had experienced a lot of coaches. I was the captain of our national team, I played in Italy for the world's top teams. I played in Russia. So I thought that I knew a lot about volleyball

It was a big pleasure and a big advantage for me as a 'new' coach to work with Roberto.  He's really amazing, especially for his individual work with his players. He was the perfect mentor.

Now in my 5th year of coaching I can really say that I kept the passion that I had for the game. I really have the same feeling.

I have the same attitude towards becoming a better coach as I had back in the days, on the court as a player. There is so much to improve upon.:-)

Having somebody by your side that has been through it all like Roberto is of course a great opportunity to start out with..

Yeah, as I said earlier, when you were a player and you played at a high level internationally, Olympics, World Championships...it's impossible NOT to think that you know it all.

But it's a completely different job.

Volleyball occupies a bigger part of my life right now than before, even though we were playing all the time and travelling for 12 months more or less. As a coach "everything" is important, it's a huge responsibility.

That brings me to the running joke that we had with Roberto. "If you want to have a lot of free time, just become a volleyball coach."

You never stop thinking about your team, how your team is playing, changes you can make, changes you shouldn't make...

And it's a process in and of itself to try to separate the coaching life from all the rest.

But it's really difficult.

What is an advice that you want to give to any coach that is starting out? A lesson or way of thinking that was helpful to you?

That's a good question.

I think that when you start to do something new, you want to immediately make a good impression.

I started to do this immediately because when I was an assistant I learned that when you are clear and honest in your communication that your body language follows that same path. Body language is still a topic where a lot of people are not talking about, your players put at least the same amount of attention on how the coach is acting as on what he is actually saying.

All of your players will understand that you are yourself, that it's not an act. That honest and open contact is important.

I think without having had the opportunity to be an assistant coach first, it would have been difficult to pick all this up. If I had to start over again, I would have done the same...be an assistant coach of an experienced and veteran head coach and develop your own coaching style.

Roberto really prepared me to become a responsible head coach.

Do you have a particular goal as a coach? Can be personal on a team or club level, or all of those.

Look, I really love doing this.

When you love to do something and you can transmit that passion to your players everything becomes easier.

My goal is to try and make them all realize that what they are doing now can be one of the best parts of their life. We don't know what life gives us, but take a look around you at least, all things considered the thing that we're doing here is pretty awesome.

And I know that you feel the same way also, I think that if you could turn back the time you also want to play again, me too. And that's normal.  (Matias: nodding my head here)

I think that we must give them this lesson and if we're able to give them this advice and they understand it, their volleyball career becomes way more fulfilling for them.

And it sounds very simple, but with 'happy' players, it's easier to work, they are open for your advice and are available for continuous improvement.

But let's be clear, it's not about sacrifice either...don't sacrifice your life for volleyball. But be balanced and enjoy the time that you can play, I want to instil that lesson.

It's that cliché, but it's true, 'now it's time to play volleyball and have fun, use your talent wisely'

This of course brings me to this question. How do you deal with players where you feel that there is hidden potential, maybe they aren't aware of it, or they don't give it a chance...

At the start of the season, I speak with all my players first with the entire team, the entire group and after that we make time for 1 on 1 conversations.

After that we have 2 more 'sessions' during the year, halfway through or before a big competition and we do some kind of evaluation also...BUT I'm talking all the time, every day and to everybody, trust is about being able to be an open communicator.

I really want and need to know my players. And want them to trust me and like we said before, words and what comes out of my mouth is just a part of that.

I don't want to leave any stone unturned here.

The future of volleyball, from a technical point of view, how will the game evolve according to your opinion? Are there any changes that you would like to see happening to make the game more attractive?

The last 4 or 5 years we've seen this 'evolution' of our attackers using these wipes and pushes in attack, you know, the rules are the rules and a point is a point, but it made the game unclear and subjective.

We're depending on the referees to judge a specific technical movement and that's not how I want volleyball to see played. It's unclear to us, it's even more unclear for the fans.

A solution would be to completely remove all the soft touches in our 3rd contact, to follow the beach volleyball rules even, that would solve a lot of issues.

That's what I would like to see changed.

How could we keep on developing our sport? I'm also thinking about that.

When I stopped playing a couple of years ago, a hard, fast serve was considered one that topped around 110km/h.

That speed went up considerately, there are always outliers, people that serve over 120-125km/h, but the average speed increased also that's for sure...everybody is serving faster.

In my opinion this happened because the level of physical preparation increased, more teams are training better. Players are more prepared physically.

Getting 'best practices' both from a performance and an injury prevention side together and being able to offer these to our young athletes will further increase the spiking and serving speeds.

But for sure let players stay healthy longer.

What is your opinion about the first touch in reception, having been a world class receiver I already have an inclination what your answer will be.:-)

I was a receiver, I love to see specialised receivers with a great 'bagger'. (underhand receiving)

So if I could change another rule, I would go so far as saying that we shouldn't be able to receive overhead anymore. :-)

Again, it's a difficult action to judge, receivers are standing on the 3 meter line and from there they receive these speedy float serves. It looks weird even.

So my next question has to be this. Most pro teams have an individual receiving practice with their receivers in the morning...so your guys aren't receiving overhead in that practice?:-)

No. When we do our receiving practice, it is 'bagger' (underhand receiving) all the time. I think that this is the right time to try and improve your underhand receiving skills.

In a game, you have to do what feels most comfortable to you, you feel more secure with overhead receiving, be my guest, in the game it's about being efficient.

We took away a lot from the game of volleyball over the last few years, I feel that there should be more opportunities for smaller, technically well balanced players, more of these players on the court will increase your chances to defend.

I can see that we would have more rallies and the game would be more clear for our fans, I like both of these things.

What pops in my head now is this. Some time ago we had that net touch rule that you could touch the net from below, but not the net tape above, right?

Right now in Poland we have this awesome challenge system, it captures EVERYTHING, but these small touches of the net with your back or the shoulder or whatever, touches that don't impact the actual blocking of the opponents spike, they shouldn't interrupt our game.

Also that is a rule that isn't helping our game at all. I think we tried to change enough here today. :-)

Best game you've ever seen or experienced. Very simple, what recent or game from the volleyball vaults did validate once more that volleyball is the greatest sport on the globe. For sure share your opinions about this matchup, what you took away from it.

Okay, there were some really amazing games. I think every Olympic final was very interesting.

It's everybody's dream to play the Olympic final and take that gold.

Well, I need to answer this. It's probably easiest for me to talk about the games that I played, that I experienced and which sensation they gave me.

My most amazing feeling or sensation was the opening game of the 2014 World Championships, when we played in the 'open' stadium in Warsaw in front of 60.000 people.

Maybe the game was not so amazing or interesting. But for me it was one of the most emotional games ever, the atmosphere was really amazing, all those emotions standing there in front of 'our crowd'.

The sensation that I had, I take that with me forever.

Honestly, when I want to get my act together, still today, I will sometimes close my eyes and try to feel that same exact sensation that I had during that game. It works every single time.:-)

That same World Championship, the final that we won against Brazil, is another game that will stay close to me forever.

After we scored the last ball,  there are 10 seconds where I don't have a clue what happened, what I did. I really was 'over'joyed I think.

I had to rewatch the tape to know what happened there. :-)

Those 2 games are really important to me. My best memories.

When preparing a new game (next weekend), how does your general approach look like and did you ever change your approach?

When I was still playing and I went to the video meeting, they were mostly one hour long, sometimes 2 times one hour for the same opponent, depended on the coach.

I don't want to say that it was boring, but I can say that I always only distilled out what I thought was important for me and my position on the court.

Also there I was lucky to have had a mentor like Roberto Piazza. I base my current prep work on how he works.

We watch the last 4-5 games of our opponent.

I'm finding a few key ideas or concepts in the opponents game. I write my own game plan down.

That game plan I cross check with the actual numbers that our scouters give me.

If both of these 'plans' correspond. Good, I'm done. If they don't, well I'll have to check why they differ and what I've missed.

What do we communicate with the players?

So we have to ruthlessly remove information and only give them what really matters.

We, as coaches, watch an average of 7 hours of video a week, my players watch 15, maybe 20 minutes.

When I'm watching games now, I'm always trying to imagine and reflect on what the coach of that team his next move will be, that is my 'practice' now. That is how I train.

I ask myself, what would you do in this situation? What would you do in that situation?

What is an unusual habit or an absurd thing that you love?

I love coffee, I drink it before practice, when I'm watching games...mostly I overdo it. But that's ok.

Another thing is music, I listen to music in the office, not that loud, but it relaxes me and around people that know me a bit, they for sure heard me signing along also.:-)

How has a failure, or apparent failure, set you up for later success? Do you have a “favorite failure” of yours?

We learn more from our failures than from our victories, that's what everybody says. It's still only sport, but I can say that I had my lessons.

My biggest failure that I remember as a player was during the Olympic Games of 2008.

We played the quarterfinals against Italy, it was 15-14 in the 5th set for them and I got a set on a pipe(backrow) attack.

I went up, it didn't feel like I would have a big block against, I spiked and the hands of the block go up very late, they touched it and that touch made it possible for them to win that rally in transition.

Done, Italy won 16-14. Olympics OVER.

That moment was very difficult for me. The Olympics are a special moment for any athlete, we were preparing for 4 years for it with our group. I remember I was crying after that game even.

But soon after, I also understood that we would have other possibilities. That this sport would give us more chances to show how good we are. And that maybe in those future situations the outcome will be different.

As a coach, failure is your guide. It makes it very clear where you have to work on. When you're winning you become blinded for what is not working. Winning does that to you. It makes you less focused.

Even if you know that it does that, it still makes it difficult to realize your priorities.

Are there any resources or books that you particularly like?

There was one book that I read when I was an assistant coach in Belchatow, it's called 'The Inner Game of Tennis'.

Upon reading I remember that I told Roberto Piazza: "why didn't I have this book when I was a player, it would have made a lot of things so much easier." It was really interesting.

(Matias: A great summary of 'The Inner Game...' is to be found HERE, also Liam Sketcher recommended this book in his article on VolleyBrains)

Outside of that I believe a lot in the energy between people, building up trust and letting your intuition do the job, I don't want to have any barriers between me and the people I work with.

I try to talk to a lot of coaches, pick up as many things as I can. But of course there is no definite perfect recipe for anything. Every situation is a bit different and needs a different approach.

For me there is a lot of learn, a lot to do.

Thanks Michal!

Next week you can expect an article that covers "communication and message delivery". With the help of Hugh McCutcheon



