===== SESSION: https://volleybrains.com/angelo-lorenzetti/ =====

----- VIDEOS -----
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ilGxeSYhXj4

----- TEXTO -----
3. Angelo Lorenzetti: 'Study the game because it never stops teaching you something new.'

Hi Volleybrains readers,

My first memories of following Italian Serie A1 volleyball are the finals of the 2001-2002 season. Daytona Modena versus Sisley Treviso, one of the truly classic battles.

That finals race was won by Modena in 4 games. At Modena were playing legendary players like Andrea Giani, Lloy Ball, Roman Jakovlev and Luca Cantagalli. Treviso had Bas Van De Goor, Lorenzo Bernardi, Samuele Papi, Alessandro Fei and Alberto Cisolla.

Modena's coach at that time was Angelo Lorenzetti. Angelo is the current coach of Trentino Volley and he was very willing to answer our Volleybrains questions. You can find his answers below.

Enjoy.

Why and how many years ago did you decide to commit to being a professional volleyball coach? What pushed you towards that decision.

I was coaching in my hometown. These players were trained by me from a very young age. Eventually together we reached the second national series, the ‘serie A2’

While I was coaching them, I was also working in a bank. The idea to become a professional volleyball coach had never crossed my mind.

One day, while I was working in the office, Julio Velasco called me. He asked me if I was willing to bet on myself.

I could start out working for the youth national teams of the Italian Volleyball Federation. But I had to quit my job because both jobs weren’t compatible. I thought about it for an entire day and I decided to change my life.

Sports has always been my passion. A passion that my father passed on to me. Every weekend we would go to any sports competition that took place in our city.

What advice would you give yourself as a starting coach? An advice that is so clear and logic for you now, but that you had to develop over the years.

Do you have a particular goal as a coach? Maybe a goal that you already reached or a goal that is so hard to reach that it gives you daily motivation?(and some healthy stress :-)) Can be personal on a team or club level, or all of those.

My goal as a coach is to be a happy coach. I am a happy coach when:

The relationships I have with my players are optimal.

I see and feel that we all got on the same train to reach the same destination

When, I understand that gym work makes sense. That the work and effort we are putting in every day helps the team to improve.

And of course, I'm a happy coach when we win!

The future of volleyball, how will the game evolve according to your opinion? Or what are you hoping for that the game will look like in a couple of decades? Will the speed of the game increase? Will the game become more technical?

It will be, as it has always been: serve and reception will chase one another and the same thing will happen with attack and defense. Each phase of the game will ask questions to the next and the next phase will answer accordingly.

The game will always get faster and more powerful. Players will keep on developing and more complex techniques will get invented.

According to you, what rule change is necessary in the future? And why would you want to see this new rule implemented?

I think a lot about the future volleyball. About 7 players on the court in the break point phase (4 in the backcourt and 3 in the front)

About the removal of the net foul.

About a rule that forbids to set up a screen by the front row players when you are serving.

About a game with fewer breaks. With only 1 time-out per team to be used only if the team is at a disadvantage. And only 1 video challenge per team.

About a scoring system that favours  balance. Which for me is the essence of our sport (15 points per set - whoever reaches 4 sets first wins - change of court in the first, third and fifth set - change of rotation only in the third, fifth and seventh set)

About the management of individual discipline and fair play on the court.

Why not ask a silly question also, we had so many serious ones. :-) So, you are Dr. Frankenstein and have the ability to put together the world's most performing volleyball player. Which at least 5 characteristics would he/she have.

I'm inspired by the qualities of players that are currently playing. I want to give a good answer to this question. At the same time I don’t want to mix my own players with other players. That’s the correct thing to do.

So to be able to answer I won’t take into consideration the characteristics of the players that I'm currently coaching.

I can give you six characteristics and six matching players.

Juantorena's eternal talent

Kazijski's sportsmanship

Brunhino's empathy

N'Gapeth's smile

Kubiak's competitive spirit

The power of Leon

When preparing a new game (next weekend), how does your general approach look like and did you ever change your approach? Why did you change and was the outcome beneficial?

My approach is always changing. It changes every season because the player group I'm coaching will have also changed.

Our approach also changes every game because the opponent changes. I also believe that my team’s emotional state changes throughout the season, also that needs to be taken into consideration.

In essence, I try to understand what the most important thing is for my team to have a great focus on the next game. Do they need to get motivated, do they need more technical help, will we focus more on the tactical aspects of the preparation. So we put our emphasis on what we need most.

Obviously I don't always succeed!

What is an unusual habit or an absurd thing that you love?

The ‘pre-game’, the hours leading up to the game, I like to be by myself. I live them in solitude.

How has a failure, or apparent failure, set you up for later success? Do you have a “favorite failure” of yours?

In 2004 I was coaching Modena and they fired me. I lost my job. I already answered in the first question I had bet my life on our sport.

Well at that moment it seemed to me that the entire world collapsed on me.

It was a moment of great personal reflection. In that period I established a series of principles for myself. These principles make sure that in the future my dream will never become my prison.

Looking back now, I can say with certainty that it was a very beautiful and decisive period for me.

If you can make the strongest 'starting six' in the world, right now. What would your team look like?

Again, I will only choose players I've never coached. And I chose these players because this team doesn’t need a coach but only a good President! Just let them play.

Setter and opposite: De Cecco – Atanasijević
Middles: Simon – Musėrskij
Outside hitters: Leon – Kubiak
Libero: Balaso

Do you have a book that you like a lot? Which lessons did you get out of it?

I like the Science of Coaching Volleyball by Carl McGown.

He taught me that a coach has to study the game of volleyball with a passion. That every action that a coach takes must have a scientific basis and can’t be conditioned by his personal opinion. Only react after analysing the facts.

What is one of the best or most worthwhile investments you’ve ever made?

I have invested my life in sports, I learned and continue to learn how to relate to people. My relationships are the outcome of my investments.

What advice would you give to a smart, driven young coach about to enter the “professional coaching world”?

Two important quotes that a young coach should live by.

A follow up to the last question. Maybe even more important, what advice should they ignore? What are bad recommendations you hear about coaching or training volleyball?

A coach is not a magician. Don’t let anyone convince you that you have full control. It’s true that we are the leaders, but it is also important to know that we are only a small part of the team's mechanism.

If you could have a gigantic billboard anywhere with anything on it — metaphorically speaking, getting a message out to every athlete or coach on the globe — what would it say and why? It could be a few words or a paragraph.

The lyrics of one of my favourite songs go like this:
"An idea, a concept, an idea. As long as it remains an idea it is only an abstraction. If I could eat an idea. I would have made my revolution "

Probably they translate in a strange way and they won't fit that billboard, but they are a great lesson to me.

In the last five years, what new belief, behaviour, or habit has most improved your life?

This contradiction:

Being so determined with my work thinking that a lot depends on me.

The humility of understanding that it can't all depend on me.

When you feel overwhelmed or unfocused, or have lost your focus temporarily, what do you do? (What questions do you ask yourself?)

I go to my lair ... like a bear! I make a confusing list of things that I want to change. I eliminate the things that don’t depend on me.

Between everything that remains I choose the most important things, I concentrate and work on those.

Thank you Angelo for your insights.

I wanted to throw in some 'on court' highlights of Trentino - Civitanova, a game played in December of 2020. Also the game that Vital Heynen referred to in his article.

Check it out.



