===== SESSION: https://volleybrains.com/hugh-mccutcheon/ =====

----- VIDEOS -----
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=n44YaaZfqSU
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YGmb32JR6jo
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MgnmpbihrY0
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Ot3E4MilLlc
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Vc-gmGXVBbI
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PknNoJwHfnk
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-F3uCfUF5eQ
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-rb077kve8g
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yfnsIE8Bu2k
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=b9HT1aXvvlE
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KCfJJd2oBcw
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TALo4iwOlCU
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8dpEulFx_Gw
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DjHJaNk2Lx0
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jqkDYnLf8ak
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_k-Xigg-phk
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6JKtEKwsgj0
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qptQ9t00ibQ
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gmTYE-BM1Qs
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cf7M64eWgqA
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=R0-eMVTzMvs

----- TEXTO -----
30. Hugh McCutcheon:"It's about committing to a standard of competitive excellence."

Last week we highlighted Hugh McCutcheon's recent TedTalk, this week we'll cover our conversation we had with him. Hugh is of course known for coaching both the USA Men's as Women's teams for an extended period between 2005 til 2012.

Resulting in an Olympic gold medal on the men's side and a silver medal and 3 Grand Prix wins on the women's side. Hugh is leading the Minnesota Gophers women's volleyball program since 2012 and became a volleyball Hall of Fame member in 2018.

I hope you enjoy Hugh's answers to our VolleyBrains' questions. And if you didn't already also check out his Ted Talk.

Hugh, what pushed you towards becoming a professional volleyball coach?

Yeah, I think originally coaching was a means to an academic end.

I was going to graduate school and I could coach at the same time, I ended up doing two different master's degrees. One was in exercise science and statistics and one's a master's in business administration.

And while I was going to school, I was thinking, okay, I can do this master's degree and then maybe get into a PhD program.

As I was doing it, I was like, academics is fine, but coaching is actually a little more intriguing.

And that's why I did my business degree because coaching is a fickle business to say the least. I thought, at least if I have a real world qualification, then you could get into coaching and have something to fall back on.

I think the parallels between coaching and management are pretty strong, but that's another discussion.

It was never about, Hey whatever, trying to make money and do all this stuff.

It was like, Hey, I can go to an Olympics or I could be the head coach of this team or now I could coach women or now I can do something different and try to apply these principles in a different way.

So yeah, that was really the motive.

What advice would you give yourself as a starting coach? An advice that is so clear and logic to you now, but that you had to develop over the years.

I'm going to answer this in two ways.

I think if I was talking to my younger self, I would be...

One, a little more patient. I think there's a tendency when you're young to want stuff to happen immediately.

And then two. Understand that the coaching life is a little more in the gray than it is maybe necessarily black or white.

And I think when you're young, you're afforded the naivete of conviction, you know, like, Hey, this is the way we're going to do it and every other way is terrible.:-)

You know what I mean. These opinions tend to be very polarizing and I think just being open to listening to everything and forming your own opinions about things  is an important part of the coaching process.

But the most important part of that process...and so this is why I'm saying that I'm going to answer it two ways is...

As a young coach, you really need some guiding principles that are gonna help you to...well kind of have evaluative criteria for all the stuff that's out there.

Do you have a particular goal as a coach? Maybe a goal that you already reached or a goal that is so hard to reach that it gives you daily motivation?

Sure. I think the goal for me and my current job is to help these people become the best they can be on the court and to help them be the best they can be off the court.

To help them develop at a pretty important formative time in their lives so that they can leave us and go on and play professionally or go to the USA team or go to a company or start their own business or do whatever they want to do.

But go on and give them a good launching pad for their next phase in life.

Hey, every time we step on the court, we want to win. Of course we want to win, right?

We're going to work hard and we're going to compete. We're going to do everything we can to win, but it's not about winning and losing.

"Tradition is never the right reason to do anything. Unless it’s the right reason." In researching for our call that is a quote that came back a few times...

I think that's a really important thing that people have to understand. True.

That got me to the next question. On exercise science, on group thinking, on motivational factors and so on... there is so much research coming out constantly. I heard you say that coaching isn't really about changing concepts. But adding layers of mastery to our skillset as coaches.
What are some resources you tend to inform yourself with?

Yeah. It's more organic than that. It's not too directed.

First of all, I think in coaching because there is the a human element, even though I get it, it's expressed in sport, but you can pull stuff from so many different fields.

So I just think for me anyway, being open to applying things from psychology or music or mathematics, or a whole lot of different fields is or has been good.

I don't try to just limit my content to a particular genre or a particular author or podcast or whatever. But what I do is again, going back to this idea of guiding principles, I have a very clear idea of what I think should be driving our method.

And from that, you can take all this different content from all these different areas and then figure out how to apply it in your world.

Over the years the amount of content that comes our way is, well it started to become really difficult to filter everything through your own standard and through your own convictions...

It starts to become really difficult to filter it and know what is the good stuff and what is not.

And believe it or not, I actually like to think I like to come up with some original content.

So before I read a book, I want to know that it's going to be good. I'm not searching answers. I'm quite happy to sit there and ponder and really think about...how do we want to approach this? And how do we want to do it.

Versus looking for someone else's answer.

So I think you've got to have that right balance. It's not arrogance. It's really just this conviction or belief that, Hey, I can figure this out and I'll start with me.

And then if I need to pull in a third party, then let's try to find what other people are doing or let's see what other content is out there.

And I don't mean that I'm trying to reinvent the wheel, but I also know much more about my circumstance and how I want to do things.

So let's start with that, take a moment to just turn all the devices off and just have a think and see what happens.

You already have sufficient control of your environment and the most important for you is getting back to your own principles and seeing, is what I'm doing, or what I'm thinking, is this congruent with my principles?

Absolutely. And because I've been able to work in a lot of different environments, it can be enough to ask myself, Hey, when we had this problem with this team, how did we approach it?

Or when we were doing it with this group, was it different?

All teams are different, right? Not only, within four year quadrennials or 10 year spans, but also year to year, the team changes as the personality changes.

The Socratic method seems to be a big part of your coaching method.

In going over some YouTube clips, I heard a bunch of phrases like…’What do you think?’, my favourite being ‘One more litmus test?’...

For sure it's part of your style…is this something that comes natural to you or did you intentionally start to implement these questions? Not a very specific question, but I noticed it going over some training clips.

For me, before I was a coach, I was a player and I started playing volleyball quite late.

And so I always felt like I was playing catch up and that I was always behind and I had to improve.

And so I got into this...well I made a lot of decisions in my life based on getting into environments that could help me to become better at volleyball.

And as you add layers of mastery as you continue to improve, figuring out not just what I have to do, but how I can apply that and why it's going to help me be a better player and all that kind of stuff.

So I try to use that in my coaching because I think it leads to faster improvement, but also more permanent change.

I watched a youtube clip where you talk about serving and passing with 2 of your players. It's a simplistic deduction that I made, but being from Europe and knowing how the game is taught over here I think it's not a wrong statement to say that American student athletes on average understand the technical intricacies of the game a bit better than the talented European athlete of the same age...

I think I agree. I think they know, like they can read the game, they see the game and they can play the game, but there's inefficiencies that could help them to be better.

And so there's no real, and these are broad strokes we're painting with here, but there's not the same attention to technical detail that maybe could allow them to become even better.

And to your earlier question, my coaching style, it's not all Socratic, I'm not just putting all the learning on their shoulders.

There's a ton of feedback and Hey, we need your foot here, or your leg there, or this was inefficient.

But it is also important to try to get them to create that feeling within themselves. Hey, I know the difference when I was doing it right. Or when I was doing it inefficiently.

The practice of agreeing on a mission statement and adhering to that is something that you implemented with the Men’s Team on the road to Beijing.

Assessing after every practice if you made strides in the right direction or not.

Reid Priddy:"When Hugh McCutcheon became the head coach of the USA Men’s Team following the 2004 Olympic Games, he had a specific vision of where he wanted to go.

In the opening summer of the quad, Hugh had all of us commit to a two-day mission statement workshop. NOBODY, besides Hugh, thought it was a valuable use of our time.

Young, athletic men sitting in small groups discussing future goals and making defined commitments is just not in our nature.
Looking back, it was one of THE most important moments for the team that would go on to win the gold medal.

What the process did for our team was provide everyone with a clear target, rather than leave it to be an assumed target, and helped us develop the road map to get there.

Hugh would hold us to it daily.

At the beginning of each practice something would be said about our goal and at the end of practice he would ask, did we take a step towards or away from our goal (there is no middle ground)? What is absolutely amazing is that I can only remember two practices where we took no ground. Two practices in four years!

I think that was due to the gym culture where everyone was focused on one common goal and it was mentioned and reinforced on a daily basis.
The mission established the culture and it became the instrument to measure all behavior and action."

Has that remained to be a part of your end of practice ritual? A senior Men’s USA team going for gold is a different environment of course than a collegiate student athlete team in Minnesota.

Yeah, we do. It's a similar process, but again, it depends on the group.

So some years we might get into a mission process other years we might... if you look on YouTube, there's a video that the 2015 group made called 'Female Warrior'.

And really it was speaking to this idea of how they felt about the fact that society struggled to reconcile the fact that they were women and the fact that they were athletes and how they could do both.

And so I think we've tried to find ways where we can get the athletes to articulate their outcome goals.

Which really in my current environment don't change too much, we're trying to win the conference and we're trying to win the national championship. And that's that.

And finding ways for those groups to express those behaviors. Because it's committing to that, right?

Everybody wants to win, but not everybody's prepared to do what it takes to win.

What are you hoping that the game will look like in the future?

I think volleyball is really unique in lots of ways, but one of the main advantages we have is that we have a men's version and a women's version that are both really good.

It's hard to say that in other sports.

I think that there's parity between the two versions of the sport between the genders. Volleyball is one of the few sports where we change the constraints of the playing environment to adjust for the difference in height and power.

And so I think volleyball is in a really good position, especially to grow or leverage, this idea of the women's side of it. And men's volleyball is excellent also. Believe it or not. I care about all things volleyball.

I would be fine coaching men. I happen to coach women now, but I really enjoyed coaching men as well.

I think the biggest issue on the men's side currently is the amount of service errors, that's something that we have to try to figure out, a way to reign that in a little bit.

If we could serve it in a little more yeah, that would be great. The variance in our sport, the biggest issue is always going to be the fact that it's best three out of five. I don't know what the answer is to that but that's why, everyone says, Hey, we could be like the NBA or whatever or football, European football.

But there's this variance in time. The game could go for an hour, it could go for three hours and that's really hard for TV to get behind.

So again, I don't have answers to that, but what is happening now can become some kind of solution for that maybe...with VolleyballWorld which in my opinion has been a great decision by the FIVB to separate kind of church and state, to get the business side over here and the political side over there.

And I used "political", generally, that's got a negative connotation. I'm just talking about as an international Federation, you have to cater to all the 2222 countries or whatever it is.

So there's that kind of element of the game, but events and production of events and TV and marketing, that's a real thing in our sport.

So I think it's great that the FIVB is doing it. The product's really good. Both sides of it are really good.

I think there are incredible opportunities for our sport to continue to grow. But at some point either TV's got to take the fact that they're prepared to manage the variants of time for matches or figure out maybe a different way of doing it.

But there's no easy answer to that one, but yeah, volleyball is great.

So yes, service errors on the men's side, let's get rid of that. Maybe less than 20% would be acceptable. You know 25-30%, it's just, it's tough to watch because the men's game is so good. It's so good.

Best game you've ever watched or experienced. What are some of your favourite matchups?

There's been a few. So I consider myself very fortunate.

I think with all the groups that I've got to coach with, there've been really positive moments where everything comes together and you play your best.

When I was an assistant coach for six years in men's volleyball. We won 2 national championships and both of those national championship finals were really great and unique matches.

We won them both 3-0 and the team played great. And there were so many wonderful moments there. But I think also the Olympic final was great, but I think the Olympic semi-final was the best match of the Olympics.

I think our match with Russia was just a phenomenal match. Hitting efficiency was like 4.10. I think their hitting efficiency was 4.05. You know what I mean? Those are big numbers.

And yeah, that was a pretty special thing to be a part of.

A ton of matches when I was coaching the USA women, especially some of the Grand Prix matches.

We won the Grand Prix three years in a row, but there was a final where we were able to control Brazil pretty well and get those guys and they're a tough team.

In the college world, we've had some matches where we've been behind by a ton and come back so it's hard to just say, there's one.

I think maybe to our earlier comment, volleyball is great. So there's been a lot of great games.

And I just consider myself really fortunate to have been a part of these matches where either...

It all comes together and we play great. Or it's a dog fight and we're in there just going toe to toe, like a couple of heavyweights, trading punches and we find a way to win in the end.

That's also really satisfying.

When preparing for the next game, did you ever change your approach?

Like everything in coaching, the temptation is to believe that it's all very algorithmic, that controlled inputs lead to controlled outputs, but that's not the case.

And so, yeah, there are things that we do differently, but it's all about trying to coach to the moment, coach to the group, to the circumstance.

So sometimes, for example we're talking about the Olympics, with the men we would have pretty detailed scouting. We would have a lot of information. We will try and review that before the match, make sure everyone was clear about the plan, but you know, before the final the players were like, Hey, we think we've got a pretty good handle on it.

And let's just hit the high notes and less is more for us today. And I was like, sure, that's fine. Cause we'd played Brazil plenty. It's not like we didn't know who we're going up against.

So I think just being open to the idea...

If you could have a gigantic billboard anywhere with anything on it — metaphorically speaking, getting a message out to every athlete on the globe — what would it say and why?

One of the, I'm not particularly religious, but one of the things I say to people from time to time is, 'this too shall pass'.

And there's no serve reception entendre there. :-)

I'm just saying that your career doesn't last forever. These matches don't last forever. Your practice won't go on forever. You don't get these moments back.

So the difficult times they will pass, the great times they won't last forever.

So I think this idea of really being present and embracing what you have today and maybe having an appreciation for your circumstance, right?

We get to play a game. We're pretty fortunate, right. Even when it's crummy, we're still hanging out indoors, playing volleyball when a third of the world's living on a dollar a day.

So just having that perspective of the finitude, the fact that this doesn't last forever, that we don't get to do it forever.

And being able to appreciate how fortunate we are to be in volleyball. I think that's probably what I would speak to.

Yes, that's a great one, I see that comparison of somebody's highlight to your every day life is another important one. There is a lot of toxicity between pro players about salary rumours and maybe in the States about NIL opportunities...

And that's the thing, if we had one more billboard...

If it was about me saying what I think, I want to say, it was for sure this idea of the finite nature of our volleyball and maybe just life in general.

We spend so much time looking at what other people are doing and I'm not a big social media person. I don't have a real social media footprint, but what I know from talking to our athletes, there's these snapshots these slivers of this perfect existence that other people are showing that they're living, but you know for the other 23 hours and 59 minutes, it could be a hot mess, it could be just a complete train wreck.

And yet we're led to believe that everybody's got this better life or more going on.

And I think that constant comparison is soul crushing. So yeah "don't compare, become", become the best you can be.

Don't worry about whatever Susie Q is doing over there.

Do you have a “favorite failure” of yours? How has a failure, or apparent failure, set you up for later success?

Yeah, as hard as it is, I would say, losing the women's final, the team had been unbeaten that whole year. Brazil had a wonderful Olympics. They had that semifinal match with Russia where they really took a huge step forward.

We'd beaten Brazil the last 6 times we played them and they were the number 2 team in the world, so you know, and it was a tough match.

And Hey, kudos to Brazil, they were the better team on the day.

But I think, as challenging and as difficult as those moments are. There's plenty of opportunity for growth.

So, Yeah, I'd say that was a loss that surely stung, but the sun came up the next day and life goes on, but I was able to learn a lot from that.

Just the last thing it's also, I think, a really unique experience or I see it as a positive experience to have been on both sides of that match, to play the Olympic final and to win and to have played it and to lose.

When talking to people about how having to manage adversity, being able to speak to both sides of that coin has been good.

When you feel overwhelmed or unfocused, or have lost your focus temporarily, what do you do?

If I need to take a break for a few minutes or just try to just get recentered. If I feel like I'm pushing and I'm not going anywhere...

I'm okay, stepping away for a few minutes and then coming back.

Even when it's hard, I can still engage. I can still lean into that even if it's difficult and uncomfortable.

So I think that probably the biggest thing is just not letting those moments of adversity overwhelm or define you but finding ways to respond and to push through.

Last talks with coaches we went into talking more about the different kinds of practice situations you can develop...and about trying to find a good balance between 'game like' situations and more technical ones.

There are times in practice to learn. And there are times in practice to compete, but you can also 'learn to compete', right?

The popular narrative around competition is that, for example if you had an older brother that beat you up or something, that that made you tough and away you went.

But how about this. Loud doesn't equal lead, right?

Just because someone's yelling and screaming doesn't mean that they're being a warrior, they might just being obnoxious.

But to me, the ability to compete is being able to do your job when you need to do your job, being able to perform and execute when you know it's a big moment, right?

The idea of building those opportunities to learn how to manage those emotional responses into practice is just so we can learn or at least have tools that can help us when those moments happen in the match. So that it doesn't feel like it's a completely different circumstance.

In practice, we're keeping score and we were doing this here and put some extra expectations there...And I used these things to help manage that emotional response.

Now I can maybe have those tools available to me in a match when it starts getting big as well. That it's not something that I haven't experienced before.

What would be some of those methods that you use or used before?

Well, I think we don't get too much into consequences or punishment for losing or all of that kind of stuff.

I think, just accepting the fact that, okay, if we're going to keep score on the weekend, we probably need to keep score during the week.

And if we want to be good on the weekend, then we have to be good in these moments on practice and we have to battle it.

So now instead of coaching, maybe to some technical aspects, we started coaching to maybe more of the approach to competition or how they're going about connecting with their teammates.

Or how they're playing the game itself versus whether their foot's in the right spot or whether their arm is in the right position or whatever, you know?

So just getting them to shift gears into that space. I think is important.

Thanks Hugh for your availability.

That raps this article up. Enjoy your day!



