===== SESSION: https://volleybrains.com/anders-kristiansson/ =====

----- VIDEOS -----
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JfEkrZoaqaI
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_gbPlPQTKG8
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QwyWnrh98fU
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UD7FNzCwtUc
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=deKNKzVBKQg
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-lT0Aw-77kI
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=29GLgADPLLI
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=waImXfzdjb4
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tt3sWfY60oU
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iGURIstQRx0
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=X5kYHHw2eI8
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Afkf2C24r4w
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LSfMbW-Xrg0
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=I0MAFCrNvec
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZnT3ZXkSyDY
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kOHCU6mBe5o

----- TEXTO -----
33. Anders Kristiansson:"Dare to challenge."

In this Masterclass we feature Anders Kristiansson. Anders was inducted into the Volleyball Hall of Fame in 2017. He became famous for making the 80's Swedish Men's National Volleyball Team one of the best in Europe and in the world.

Since then he coached in the Italian Serie A1 in the early 90's leading the teams of Bologna and Treviso. Won 15 National Championships with Belgian's Noliko Maaseik taking them to 3 European Final Four tournaments. (played 2 finals!)

Following his term in Belgium, Anders won 3 National Championship titles with Greece’s Iraklis Thessoloniki and Olypiacos Pireus.

In 2013 he was named head coach of Toyoda Gosei Trefuerza in Japan’s V-League becoming one of the first foreign coaches ever in Japanese volleyball. His impact was immediately felt leading Toyoda to a National Championship, and the National and Emperors Cup Titles.

Anders has been and is an example for many European coaches.

Our dedicated readers will have seen Anders' name pop up in the Masterclass with Dutch Olympic Gold Medalist coach Joop Alberda and Tommi Tillikainen's Masterclass

Anders, when did you decide to become a professional volleyball coach?

It's not like a day where you say: 'Now I become a professional coach.'

I was working for club teams in Sweden. I was a player and I was a player-coach for many years. And then I started to train junior national teams for the Swedish federation.

Swedish national teams offered me a half-time job. I was teaching at school and then eventually I could quit that teaching job. So that could maybe be called professional, but I did also a lot more than just coaching.

So it was something that grew gradually. I worked many years like that with the national team and club teams in Sweden. But I was full time for the Swedish Federation, so to speak.

After many years working like this, I had many requests to go to professional clubs here in Europe. So that was in 1988, I think, after already having many good results with the national team and at that moment I went to Italy to coach there.

I guess it's like this for most of the coaches around, that it's something that is growing and you start out and see that this is interesting and that you want to further pursue this course.

What advice would you give yourself as a starting coach? An advice that is so clear and logic for you now, but that you developed over the years.

I must have been only in my early twenties when I started to coach. And back then I was probably quite sure about everything. What was the right thing to do. And like always youngsters should use the experience of older people or more experienced coaches.

But in my case, there was nobody to listen to. Because Sweden had no volleyball culture.

They had no generation actually before me playing volleyball. So I didn't know who to listen to. There was no internet, there was nothing about volleyball that I could find.

But again, there was nobody to talk to, no volleyball press or books or anything like that. Maybe you could go to a European championship to watch a few games.

I don't know if you realize that you're speaking with somebody who started in the mid 60's.:-)

So it's, it's hard to say what I should have done differently, but today, of course, there are many, many, many better possibilities. To meet people, to look stuff up, to Google the things. To get information and form your idea of what you want to do for a certain time.

Building a base of what you want to do or do on a little bit longer term than the next training.

Do you have a particular goal? Maybe a goal that you already reached or a goal that is so hard to reach that it gives you daily motivation?

I always have trouble with the word 'goal'.

That is how good your passing has to be? How good does your attack have to be?How many errors can you allow? Or can you allow any errors? It goes for every fundamental from serving, passing, blocking, attacking, defense, or whatever, try to measure as much as possible.

If I was a high jumper and I can clear 2 meters, and I said in 2 years, I want to do 2.20.

That is a goal. And then this goal, I have to break down in parts, in what I need to do to achieve this goal to reach that 2.20.

Okay. I had to do this physically, this coordination, this technique, this...whatever can be explosive training or eating or resting or competition or whatever.

And at the same time I say 2.20, because I think that would put me probably into a good result in a European championship or World championship or Olympic games or something.

But the goal is still 2.20 and if I can reach the goal, I will collect some fruits from it. But also at the same day, as I can clear 2.20 meters, maybe my competitor has another goal or he's possible to clear 2.30. And I'm reaching my goal only to see that there is somebody else who is better.

So I find it stupid to have a goal and say, oh, we should win a gold medal.

So for me, the goal is the next step.

And I want to be sure that this step is leading in a direction where you can take the following step. Not that it's a step that is a dead end, that is not leading to anything more.

So I know it's a long answer, but this is how I define a goal for what I'm doing.

If I just look to what I want to achieve technically or volleyball wise, it's to produce a better play and a better player. That is what I want to do, of course given the circumstances that I have.

How would you break down a volleyball coaches' or any coaches' process to reach the goal that was stabilized. Again, the goal being a specific and measurable thing. How to actually reach those goals?

Like I told you, some of the things are really difficult to break down in goals, but many things are not so difficult to break down. And the next thing is how to do this, how to reach that.

If you know, the goal is to attack on this level, with this percentage or this efficiency, because I only work with efficiency and not to killing percentage. To do that, you have to start to ask yourself how, 'how' I do that.

And 'when' I do this and with 'who' I do this, you need a philosophical touch at it.

Otherwise I think it's just, yeah, public talking. Like saying, we think that we will medal next year. That's just a logical conclusion about where you are right now.

What you explained is having the framework. The difficult thing to do for people with less experience in developing players is knowing, even if you can analyze your goal into different parts, knowing which one is the most important. Which one of these parts is the one that we should really work on and which one comes after that. But that comes with experience of course.

Yeah. Now I gave you my basic idea of how I'm thinking.

And of course we can have others. Knowing that, okay, I will have this team for 3 years or 5 years. And the goal is for me and maybe the club or the Federation or whoever I'm working for, inside this time, we will replace most of the team or half the team. AND we want to do this without losing our position in the concurrence of other teams, because you always have at least a vast idea of: how good are we right now, right.

Okay. We don't want to lose this position. So it's another way of putting a goal.

And I think a player is much more comfortable or more at ease saying s**t, I'm getting better.

Then, if there's coming somebody from another country or another team is doing something that was not known before and they're just better, fine, but I can still have been reaching my goal.

Otherwise I think we would sound like we're jus talking to the sports press. And we as coaches, try to please the sport press and say for them, what they want to hear.

But I know we have to say something that people can relate to, that it must be understandable what you're saying also, but now I'm talking about how I'm working, how I talk to the players.

If I'm talking to the press or TV, of course I would say something different. 'That we are aiming to have a good result and finishing top 3 or top 4, we have the resources for this, so if we are doing things right we will.'

But this... for me, these are words that mean nothing. If I hear this from another coach. Okay, this is not what I want to know about their team.

(Sweden winning against the USSR 17-15 in the 5th 🔥 )

The future of volleyball, how would you like to see the game evolve?

One of my favorite subjects.:-)

I always wanted to create the future of volleyball or to see possibilities, what is possible to do.

And one limitation is of course the rules, what the rules will allow you to do or if they will change and so on.

I have these two always in mind and I have for as long as I can remember, the control of space that tells you that this is not a 2 dimensional sport. This is a 3-dimensional sports. It's about how the ball is moving in the room.

For example, blocking is not about height and place. It's also about the depth of the block. And if you don't consider this, you will never be successful in your blocking.

So you need 3 dimensions. You need height, you need width and you need depth in the way you look at the situation.

It's the same with receiving a ball, in serving and so on. And in your approach and in attacking and where in the space the ball is. So you have to control the space, the volume. And when you control the volume, then the more successful you will be, if you can control the higher velocity, the higher speed at which you can do things.

And this is valid for all sports.

If you look at soccer today and soccer 20 years ago, for me, the biggest difference is the control of the speed, it's everywhere. So people that think that you just need taller players that can jump higher and so on...that's not how it works.

I think players are not jumping that much higher today than before.

I am a small guy myself, but I could touch almost 3.50, 40 years ago. And there aren't so many players that are touching so much more than 3.50 today. And you had Cuba at that time, I heard remarkable vert numbers from them. I never measured them myself. So I don't know if they are true, but they had incredible jumpers.

DDR was a powerhouse in that time they were jumping higher, if you look at the film, I think they were jumping higher than people do today.

So I don't think it's about this. I think it's about controlling space and speed, but if you can make the space bigger, in this case higher up from the ground, you're also benefited, but there are a vast amount of players who are not touching more than 3 30, 335, 340, but who have been incredibly successful over the years.

And as soon as somebody is controlling this, let's say in the attacking phase, I mean, the attacking phase from reception to setting, to attacking, this means attacking with more people in the air.

But if you have to be in the air, when the ball is set, then you have to have really good control of space and speed. So the play today is much faster. That is clear it's getting faster and faster and it's involving more players at the same play at the same rally.

And people can better control all these positions. I mean, I think I used 'pipe'(bic) before anybody even heard about the name 'pipe' or it was named 'pipe'.

I think with the Swedish national team in 1985, we played pipe regularly. I don't know if any other team was doing that. Now many can do that. Back row right side was introduced in the beginning of the 80's. Maybe late 70's. For me, this is only a logical thing.

It's not that somebody invented them. This is a logical conclusion that people are able to control. They control their jump. They control their play and a setter can control where he's giving the ball and the attackers are controlling their timing.

Then you can have many players charging at the same situation and being available. So what you see has always been like this. The first team, whoever you want to name, the first team that was successful, with playing many pipes.

Okay. Nobody could stop it really or efficiently stopping it.

But nowadays there are many stops on that or when people tried the cross combinations. In the beginning the Japanese and Poland were really successful. And then the blockers adapted.

And in this way the play has been evolving all over the years. If you look at today, look at the Europeans or the Olympics, how fantasticly the teams are covering nowadays, for instance. This doesn't mean only the cover is better, but people realize that in certain situations, I just hit to get the ball back.

So you develop a system for how to cover, how to hit the ball, or let's say how to interpret the whole situation.

So, I mean, you can play 1st tempo from the 3 meter line, I think it's possible. And yeah, it's not just the setter that can set the ball. Liberos can set. And now you have spikers who can set the ball and faking spikes from the 3 meter line and then giving the ball to left or right, or even the middle.

And this is quite close to what I told you about the hitting on the second touch in beach volleyball, actually the same idea, attracting the block and then sending it to somewhere else.

Indoor, being able to attack on the second attempt should be possible. If you can control the ball and set it directly from passing, let's say to the left side and you go up and swing there on the left side and you get two blockers up and then you send it over to the other side. You will have 1 block or zero block.

There are many ways of developing the game as it is now.

And I think the play will go from, it has already gone from power to quickness or smartness.

But of course it still has to keep to be hitting hard, but it's not the power in itself. You don't need more power than now. If you can hit the ball where nobody is, there's still no time to move to that position.

Defense is also learning how to play, where to play. You have seen the last couple of years, fantastic defensive formations, big improvements on defense. And for me being so old, I have seen this all the time. Adjusting the defense and the block to what is going on in the attack.

And I think the future will be...I tried to finish this now. :-)

I think the first thing what us always happening is that the attack will find a new way to score. And the counter movement will be from the defensive side, how we deal with blocking and defending that ball, except for just serving tougher of course.

Nowadays, the spin service from 10 years ago, they are not good anymore except some exceptions of course, there was somebody also 10 years ago that could serve really hard. But nowadays, if you serve less than 110 kilometers per hour, I think it's making no damage on the teams. It's just, it's just a 'thank you' from the receivers.

What do you consider that is needed for our sport to grow, to become a sport that can attract spectators that aren't on top of the latest rule changes or any rules even?

We love our sport.

We who are inside, who have been practicing this sport for so many years or at different levels or in different roles, if this is a manager or a coach or a physical trainer or player or whatever.

And then everybody goes like: 'Oh, what are you saying? You're  terrible.'

No, but I want to make clear, I love our sport, but I don't think the product is good.

If you play a world championship in soccer, you're having almost a full stadion with 2 'neutral' countries playing against each other, but when you play a volleyball game and it's not the home team, there is nobody looking.

And we have big, big problems to attract people who haven't played or are not really familiar with the rules.

The play is going so fast nowadays. So it's actually really difficult to single out the stars or the personalities or what's actually going on.

The other way is to reduce the things that people don't want to see. So like you said, the double service, I think that is really suicide because on top of the list of every survey that has been done about volleyball, people hate to see serve mistakes.

And we are in a big dilemma because we know if we want to make a point in our serve, we have to disturb the other team with really tough serves.

So we have to take much risk, but the audience doesn't appreciate this risk. They don't want to see that. Now I'm talking about the new people, we should want to attract the people who want to come and see our sport if it's live or television or wherever it is. Serve mistakes has been all the years on top of what people don't want to see.

Of course I like to play with pipe and no block and so on. And that's nice because it's nice for my team and it looks like a fantastic combination, but if you only play against no block all the time, and there are no rallies, there's just side out and side out and side out, this is not spectacular.

Then we must make the games much shorter, nobody wants to see 2 and a half hour of side out where it's no rallies.

Till now, defense has been pretty good at recovering the advantages that the attack has been having, but it's hard to justify that we can attack with 5 guys, but we can only block with 3. We can actually attack with 6 guys.

You just have to explore what is better. Why can't you block with 4 guys?

That is to have fixed front players and fixed back row players. That's my, I think 20 years old idea, and I have not been pushing it because I know it's a conservative landscape and I have no channels to push anymore. But I am sure this would be an important step to identify the players.

If you want to see Maradona in volleyball. Maradona is never a goalkeeper. I never saw him stay in the goal for Argentina or for Napoli or whatever, or whoever you take. Messi is not playing goalkeeper or Ronaldo.

No, people love to see them score goals and in volleyball this should be clear. This guy on the left side is good. This guy on the middle is good, and he's doing this or that, the guy on the right side plays like this.

And in the back court, you will have fantastic defensive and reception players and fantastic setters. You will have better setters than today.

Now so many people or teams are searching for setters that are also 2 meters tall so they can block, but we should just have a playmaker that is fantastic in setting the balls to the attackers.

So you should have only 3 attackers and all the time 3 attackers. And you should have all the time, fantastic defending players and this will be understandable for everybody.

And then you can change freely. If you have whatever frontline shirt on you change the frontline shirt like in ice hockey or handball or basketball, you just sub without stopping or making a sign for the secretary.

Now the player goes out, he goes in, play as you want. And you will develop specialists in left side, specialists in middle, special right side.

Everybody's playing their role and every team has a big problem in first rotation. When the opposite is position 4, we try to mend it a bit to try to fake, everybody's making rule violation when they are in that rotation.

Setter on 1 is violated by every team in almost every play and we accept it.Why aren't they good in the first rotation? Because they don't have time to practice it.

The reception attacker guys, they're practicing receiving and left side hitting, the opposite is practicing right side and back row. And it's enough time or the glass is full for the opposite to practice frontline and back row. Now he has to practice also position 4 and tell me who is fantastic opposite that is good in position 4, I haven't seen them.

So many teams are struggling there. So why do we have to play like this and show bad play to the audience? Why don't we do things that are easier to understand for the audience and just let the players excel in these things.

And then we will also involve more players. Today people are so afraid to change players when it's going bad. Then you change when somebody is a little bit tired and you have two guys on the left side and two middles and two right side guys, you have six guys that will alternate at the net and like this, you also get normal built players.

You will attract these players to play volleyball instead of saying, oh no, no, 185, you can never become a player or you have to be a libero.

Everybody will have a better profile and everybody has an easier way to work and you have to do a better job as a coach and you will excel and we will have a better game.

But if you don't want to do this, then you have to think what you can do with changes a few rules, like blocking with 4 guys or you have to invent things that make it simpler for the spectators.

I know you had another question. What rule change was wrong or what rule change wasn't beneficial for our game?

I think the touch of the net in the block. Is something that is, well,  nobody can see it. We want to have 10,000 spectators or 20.000 looking at our games. Nobody can see if there's a net violation. They just have to look at the signs from the referee, I think that is really bad.

The middle line rule maybe that's okay. So we don't have more injuries. But nobody has been injured because of the block that will touch the net a little bit. You have to define what is a block, during a block you can touch the net. In attack you cannot touch the net, something like that. You have to have a good definition of what is possible.

For example nowadays, I think it's been a liberation in terms of setting and touching the ball that there are not so many technical stoppings from the referee anymore. So that has been positive I think.

We always had 'original' answers on the 'Frankenstein question'. You can assess the world's most performing volleyball player, what traits should they possess?

Basically to have a good mentality, this is the most important.

A player must have a drive, desire, they want to be the best, not hoping or dreaming about being the best because almost everybody does that.

If you ask any boy from 7 to 10 years old, who do you want to be, they want to be a professional football player. I want to be like Messi or Ronaldo. It's not that, that is dream, hopes.

But the real desire to... somebody that knows; I have the goods, if I put everything to it, I can become the best or somebody that people remember who I was.

What I gave to the game. I can build a legacy. These kinds of players.

But of course you want the best material. If you want to build a house or a car or whatever, you want the best materials to build from.

Can I go for 3 meter tall guys :-), or can I go for 2 meter 10, I mean somebody with good physics, good physical capability, but not only strong, you have to have coordination and you have to have this understanding of how a ball is moving and what you can do with a ball.

The more versatile you can become, the more you're able to be receiving, setting, hitting, blocking, serving, passing, digging, the better it is.

I mean, in the ideal world, you should have six players like that on the court.

And if you have six players like that, then everybody can set. If you have the same rules like now, this is an invincible team, of course, because then you will have six players attacking all the time.

So I mean, this is just a dream.

It has no value to put it up like this, but if you want to be more close to what a coach should look for?

So you must be or it's good that you are a player that takes leadership in each role and in his part and that they lead the way every day. Not only during top matches.

The one who everyday goes there to be better and really mean it, easy to say, but really mean it.

The player that finishes and knows at the end of every practice: I couldn't have done better. I did all. These kinds of players, but again, the players must have material in themselves.

If you're born as a non jumper, you cannot teach somebody to jump, I mean, if they cannot jump, they will not be a great jumper.

So you have to know what you're building on.

What are the building blocks on top of which coaches should develop their day in and day out concepts about the teams they are coaching?

Most of my answers are always circling back to philosophy.

That's a philosophical approach to the whole thing and then comes, okay, what do I need?

I need knowledge. For sure, you need knowledge, knowledge about the game, about mechanics, about mental aspects and technical aspects. What do you do with a player with a certain mechanic?

If you don't know them and you're training a lot. That means that maybe you're training bad things or at least not the best things.  So knowledge in any way is really important.

When I have small clinics with coaches and nowadays I do it just for fun, mainly on the beach because I have a company, so the guys that I hire for coaching on the beach have to follow at least a line, a certain standard.

I tell them that the ideas, the basic ideas are these and they have to put them into a package called concepts.

"Oh, you shouldn't do that there. You shouldn't do that there."

So you need that concept and you need to sell these ideas to the players.

And you have to question, like you say, the volleyball schools and so on. Do they have the knowledge?

Do they have the concepts? And if they have, are they capable of selling them to the players? And I mean, selling, not that they just do it because you tell them, but selling in a way that the players incorporate your idea as their own.

That means that they will fight till they die for this idea, because they think it is the best idea.

And hopefully it is the best idea. Again, this is the philosophy about all that.

But if you don't go that way, you can build a hundred of volleyball schools. It will not help if you don't have the right people leading these schools.

I'm not saying that they are doing a bad job, but you have to question that. Are it the right people? The Federation that is mainly in charge of these schools, are they putting enough interest in these coaches to educate them, giving them the chance to educate themselves. Or paying them enough, so they stay there. Is this job recognized enough?

Because those are very important steps to take. But many of these schools, they also have their teams taking part in kind of a league or something, and it becomes important to win the next match or the entire season even.

I think it's much better to learn how to develop players and teams.

We have to have knowledge and we have to put the knowledge into concepts and the concept will lead me to also say, what kind of mechanics I need, what kind of technique I need to develop, how I need to play and how I need to sell all of this to the players.

We want to have a team on the court that will always work like a unit. If you can get six players thinking exactly the same at the same time, we will probably play the best volleyball.

If we can talk about team composition, what are important traits that you would look out for in the volleyball that we play today?

I don't have to state the obvious thing that if you are a left side spiker, the receiving spiker, normally you have two of them in every team, that's the way that 99% of the teams are playing like...well the skills from them are very obvious.

There are two things, they need to pass well and attack well, and sometimes you need to make a combination of these 2 characteristics because I haven't seen til now 2 perfect outside hitters. I think I haven't seen in one team, 2 perfect outside hitters where you can say that they are equally good in attack and they are equally good in reception.

There is always some difference. One is a little bit better reception wise. One is a little bit better attacking wise.

So these combinations you have to find, and these two skills, I think are the most important. Then, if this player is also capable of serving well and blocking well, that's good of course.

And they should also defend good, but most important is their attack.

So actually you can say you can pass lousy. If you're strong enough in attack and you still put the ball down from the set that is coming from behind, from the middle of the court or whatever...what's counting is how good you attack. That is what is counting.

You can have perfect reception. And if your attacker, if that's the fault of the setter or the attacker, cannot put the ball down, the reception has very little value.

Normally the better you receive, the better your attack will be. Or the better you dig the ball the more chances you have to make points on your own serve, in your transition game.

So you have to work on that, to be better on that. But to just say: "the most important is that he can hit fast balls." Yeah...but to what efficiency and in what circumstance, if you only have one position that is playing fast and the rest of the team is playing slow, you don't profit so much.

And then there are still 2 people maybe out there stopping you, waiting for you. So I don't know if I understand the question perfectly, but those are the skills that you have to develop.

For the middle guys it's obvious, I think the most important skill is probably the block, but you have to be good enough in attacking.

And third is the serve, or I don't know what comes first. The serve or the attack, there's sometimes middle blockers that are having three points in attack per match.

But if your team is not passing very well. Yeah. Then if you practice your middle guys to be fantastic attackers, and the ball is never coming there. Well it has little value.

So I think there are so many 'if's' in that question.

You need everybody to develop their skills on every position, but what is determining for the play and the team depends not only on that sole player, but it depends on all the team, how you are able to play.

You can have Muserskiy. And if you have a setter that still cannot even set Muserskiy in the middle or Simon, I mean, then you're in trouble.

Yeah, volleyball is a sport where everyone really depends on each other.

I don't think there is any other sport where you have to give away the ball as soon as it's comes to you. I can not see any other sport that is played like that.

A team sport, where you have to play with each other. You can always wait, stop the ball, dribble, two touches, three touches in football or basketball or handball or whatever team sport you come up with that's playing with a ball.

So volleyball is really special. And I mean, this is something you have to consider and understand that our sport is like this.

If you're, I don't know, Ganev from the old times, he just needed somebody that puts a high ball to him and he will be scoring a lot of balls.

(random 'Ganev footage'...clearly filmed with a potato back in 1996 😊)

So for him, it's important that he developed the skills to hit lousy balls against three blockers. So again, depends, depends, depends.

In my book the receiving spiker, he should also be great at setting. He should be good faking a pipe or hitting a second attack and setting the ball to the other outside and you can add and keep on adding a lot of skills

But like I started with, for him, the most important will be to receive well and to hit well. I try to point out that attack is the only thing that is really correlating with the result of the game.

But of course it doesn't mean that I want people to just hit high balls, which are coming from everywhere. Of course, an attacker wants the ball that is coming as good as possible, as precise as possible.

I think every position needs to manage and be an expert in so many things right now that volleyball would be better if you should only play on one position.

Like my 'future dream' volleyball.

Talking your front row and backrow concept and testing new concepts of play...we had Alan Knipe talk about 'Team Cup' volleyball in the early 90's, other sports also did some trial tournaments here and there.

But for sure it can't 'just' be an experiment, it should be a trial with a clear performance indicator...maybe if we hit 'x amount' of spectator engagement, it becomes a concept or rule that the FIVB should implement (being a bit naïve here 😊)

It has to be a serious, serious players, athletes giving it the time to develop.

Not to just put players into an unknown situation and just see what will happen. If you just play not having it televised etc, it makes no sense.

But as you see now for the beachers that play "king of the court", that's a fantastic progress of how to play beach volleyball but in another way. It's spectacular and much better for the spectators.

And I'm always coming back to... how can we make our rules and our own play better?

We who are in volleyball, we are proud. Volleyballers, we say we are the biggest sport in the world.

Yeah. But we for sure are not the biggest sport when it comes to spectators, maybe in Poland, but for the rest, not even close. So I think we have a long way to go there.

And again, there are many things that you can do, but we're so conservative.

Another thing while we stop this question, but still coming maybe back to another one... How can we allow that our volleyball matches end with somebody serving out or in the net? Why don't we at least play a golden point?

For example the last ball you have to win when your team is serving. I mean, this is a small change of the rules and it would make it exciting all the time.

Now, when the score is 20-14, the set is already played. Not to speak about 23-18. It's already played.

I played many tournaments that I arranged, especially on the beach with this 'golden point' rule implemented, but actually even indoor, just saying: "Okay, today we play golden points". Even in a drill in the practice, you can do this.

Golden point means: the last point I have to win on my own serve.

And then you just have to decide, the other team, is it at the same point that they also can win only on their own serve or can they go on siding out?

It depends how fair it has to be. What is fair in sport? It's another philosophical item. What is fair? Is fair that somebody can practice in a warmed up gym. And another one has to train outdoors. Is it fair that somebody can eat perfect meals all the time and somebody else can't? I mean, what I'm coming to is that for me, it's not a big problem if we would implement it like that.

When I comes to 24, the other team can still side out when they are 18, until they are 24.

We don't want that? Yes, we want that! But why don't they change it? Why don't we change it. We don't have leaders who are thinking about making this game better. This is not the way that our leaders for decades have been doing it.

Right now they want things to be neatly organized and looking good, well-packaged.

But they don't think about the product!

When preparing a new game (next weekend), how does your general approach look like. What are the concepts that you are implementing?

The important thing I think is to prepare, to bring something to the player that is different from your basic way of playing.

You have concepts of playing. We want to receive like this. We want to play this kind of offense. This is the dish that you have been serving to the players the whole week, the whole month, the whole year.

They know how to play these things. Technically, tactically, where you should stay, where you should hit, all these things.

The game preparation specifics is more to put the flavor, the salt and pepper and the sauce.

"Okay, but this team, guys, we need to attack more on that side, or we need to do more of that. Or  we make this small adjustment."

Otherwise you consider the other team as stupid. If you play an even opponent, they know you, you know them, you can scout their players. You know your own strengths.

Do things that you can control where you can change things where you can serve, where you can block defend from different situations.

And have people understand this situation throughout the game.

Then you can talk to your setter, have a game plan for your setter. "Okay, I want you to play more like this, more like that, or less like that."

You cannot say 'only' because I don't think it's happening in a team that you say, don't set one ball to that player.

Scouting, that depends on what information you have from the other team, if they always commit in the blocking, you say, okay, today we don't play any first tempo because they commit every time. Of course I don't think you have such ignorant teams that they commit every time and you never play in the middle. But just to give you the example.

Adjusting from your basic way of playing. A basic way of playing should be many concepts, for sure should be many concepts.

Then you should have a plan for the setter.

And for the others, you should have small adjustments.

And the rest must be based about small, tricky things from the other team that might happen. If you're not going into the mental stage, like you, you know, that they have or you think that they have a weak mental player, that if he's making a mistake, he's likely to do another or something like that, that might be possible.

But make a match plan that is beneficial, starting from your own strengths, that is highlighting your own strengths and covering your weaknesses.

And try to explore the weakness of the other team and take away the highlights of the other team.

And if we talk about beach volley. You select the one that you want to see attacking more than the other, without being too predictable, they should always be in doubt.

Where are you going to serve? So who will take the ball or not, or who will attack. And try to make what you want happen happen as many times as possible.

I think these are the cornerstones or the basic things for me.

But it's important that you don't make an ideal plan and you don't have the means for it. You don't have the tools, you don't have the players for it, that can execute it.

Don't make a plan for your own on how to stop Mr. X and you know you don't have players for that, then you should do something else.

The more information you have and if you can process that information into simple solutions, the better. Simple is always better.

Do you have a book that you like a lot? Are there other resources that you applied yourself to? Resources that further developed your coaching mind and that are shareable?

Yeah. I think everybody should go back to the brain.

You ask for a book or for a person or something. There is a Swedish psychiatrist. He's a professor at the very famous university in Stockholm, or one of the better ones in Europe or in the world.

His name is Anders Hanssen and he's writing very interesting stuff about the brain, how it works and how we are thinking and what we're doing to excel or why we are afraid or how we can think better or how we can...all of these things.

It's called 'The Real Happy Pill'. It's all about the brain. It's not about pills at all. It's just the irony about pills. Don't take pills! 😀 So I mean, use your brain.

I try to read articles if somebody is writing about something interesting, so somebody made a study or research on something.

This interests me. But it doesn't have to be volleyball.

It can be how people function, how you get the attention of many people on the match, how you communicate.

I mean, a successful team, like the Soviet union a long time ago and so on. I think there was not a lot of communication. But I think today you need lots of communication in the team and from the coach to the team, but not only about how to play, but more also to understand the individual, we touched a little bit on this subject before that maybe people are more individual in their values right now.

And you have to understand your players. Why somebody is playing volleyball. And what is the foundation of why he's doing that? What he's thinking.

To understand the people, then you can understand better why they are performing good or less good in practice, probably.

And I'm not a big fan of that the coach should be the best friend of the player, not like that, but to have a communication going and trying to understand each other, and again then you have a better chance to sell your ideas.

It's all about selling your ideas. And you have a customer that might be a buyer of your ideas, it's much better to have that than to have somebody that will never buy something from you. And to do that, you've got to create some kind of personal link to this player. And this I think is very important.

And this, I think you can learn from other areas than to just go and ask other coaches in volleyball.

There are some famous, good coaches like Velasco or Doug Beal or Marv Dunphy. People that I know from before, but I almost never had the chance to ask them to improve my work very much.

A little bit with Doug Beal, we happened to meet each other a long, long time ago when I had the national team and he had about the same circumstances as me, a limited number of players and so on. And with Velasco, I heard some of his clinics. I think he's very good in teaching also the values or general things to coaches.

These are good lectures, but it's not really a lecture for me to improve if I have a top team in whatever competition somewhere, I don't think that will really change my style a lot.

You learn by talking to people, but I told you that I was alone in Sweden. There was nobody to ask.

I was at the university of physical education in Sweden. So I learned physiology from there and methodology from there. I went to the other university in Stockholm to study psychology and sociology and other matters.

I don't think so. You have to have a little bit broader mind about things.

So your question is where do I find these? Or is there any person?

For me, it has not been any person, but at the same time has been many persons that I want to talk with, exchange ideas with, but I have not been able to be in the position of knocking on someone's door to give me the answers. No.

These five things, these questions, and trying to answer them for myself.

Why, why to do something or why I should do this thing, why to play like this, why to do these things now in practice. Why to do it like this? Why to play like this and when to play like this, when to practice like this, how to practice and who should practice like this. And when should somebody practice like this.

These are small words and small questions, but they have big meaning, if you can answer them.

If you ask them everyday for your training program and you can answer them always with a good answer, I think you are really on the good way.

We went over a lot today. Starting from getting the knowledge, putting your ideas into a concept, communicate them well to your team. No need to copy a certain way of coaching, mix your own personality in it...but staying true to the teachers', the coaches' mindset.

I think be open-minded. Discuss it. Process it and make, like you say your own decision.

Just copying things isn't the way.

But that doesn't mean that you don't do something that somebody else is doing. If you see something interesting and you find out the answer, why this is interesting or good, then you maybe try to do it.

But never do... I think I never did something because somebody told me to do it like that.

Why it has to be like this?

And I think it's good to be a bit of a rebel, but of course you have to be inside the frame; inside the FIVB rules..., I was not the best example of this anyway a long time ago, nowadays I'm better.😀

Rock the boat, if you can.

That's my way, my motto, and it has always been.

We played under a banner 6 years in a row in Japan, and it said: "Dare to challenge."

I got the whole Japanese team to fight and it was great. Dare to challenge that means myself also, dare to challenge yourself. Dare to challenge the so-called true things, dare to challenge what we have been doing before.

That was for me, the door to open in Japan to make things happen in there.

To come to Japan and just do what they were doing before, then you don't need me, then you need a Japanese coach.

Thanks for your time, Anders.



