===== SESSION: https://volleybrains.com/tore-aleksandersen/ =====

----- VIDEOS -----
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HfSEbg_URQU
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lKrZdIARvSU
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LaRpoReeFsM
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1VULWvEZUBM
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=84SwgaA2CI4
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uv-hizN4Sbw
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zEjwL10BMWc
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eMkYZWdwD-c
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_sVraV8jg6g
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=N9WcjP-RvGM
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=n1GlJ59O1MQ
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LnMEms6cvZY
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GjLQavaVC-o
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lhmUSBuHYN0
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=aF2iO6ee4TU
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dd2a6SmB7QE
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=509eYxNR7lY
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZBYPBQ0Xzmk
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7uif0aFNShM

----- TEXTO -----
34. Tore Aleksandersen: "Knowledge is power."

In today's Masterclass we share the experiences of Tore Aleksandersen, Norwegian head coach of the German powerhouse of Allianz Stuttgart. For more than 20 years Tore has been developing himself into the coach he is today.

In this Masterclass it will become very clear that his pursuit for knowledge has never stopped.

During this season (2021-2022) Stuttgart has won the German Cup, became the runner up in the European CEV Cup competition and right now they are participating in the play off semi finals of the German league.

There are 17 original video clips and 7000+ words in this article.

Enjoy!

Tore, why did you decide to commit to being a professional volleyball coach? What pushed you towards that decision?

With coaching, I started really early. I was around 18 years old and coached a team of my home island in Norway and we went up from the juniors to the seniors level and eventually we played in the first league.

At the same time, I was the national team coach for the Norwegian girls team. Yeah, so it kinda went on and on, but at one point I found out that I wanted to be a professional coach.

And also until the day today, I'm the first Norwegian guy who has worked abroad as a professional coach. We have a Norwegian assistant coach now in Schwerin and my assistant coach now here also in Stuttgart but both of those guys I took with me at one point.

I started to kind of contact clubs at that time. I'm so old so at that time it was not over the internet like it's possible today. So I used the telefax and phone calls.

And I wanted to go abroad because, we'll maybe speak later on about philosophy and so on...

The knowledge I wanted or that I felt I needed.

And I went to the United States where Arie Salinger was preparing a kind of professional league, they practiced and prepared the league at 'Sports Performance' in Chicago.

So I was there for two, three weeks to prepare. And they were making that league there, with only four teams, but still it was some kind of league. And they asked me if I would apply and I applied and I got one of the head coaching positions there and that was kinda my first job abroad.

That professional league was called the USPV league and that was in 2001. So it's 20 years ago now already.

We had some good players there. I had Lindsey Berg on my team, she was my setter and Hugh McCutcheon's wife, Liz Bachman was one of my middle blockers.

There were 4-5 American players in my team that made the national team in the following year. It were only 4 teams in that league, but it was really interesting. It was fun.

What advice would you give yourself as a starting coach? An advice that is so clear and logic for you now, but that you had to develop over the years.

In Norway, we had a soccer coach some years ago who was taking our national team to European Championships and World Championships and I was at a coaching clinic with him and he said that "knowledge is power".

For me, what I also would say myself and what I would advise to all younger coaches now is that they should go and learn from the best coaches around.

Because it's there where it all happens. It doesn't happen behind a table in a school. You can take a formal education about sport and stuff.

But if you want to really learn the game and understand the game you should go to the best coaches in the world, travel there, sit at their practice, watch them, talk to them, watch as much volleyball as you can, because this has helped me so much.

If it was Lang Ping or if it was Ze Roberto. Whoever it was... Arie Selinger, I've been many times to him. You go and you watch and you learn.

Because for me in volleyball nowadays the teachers of the game have disappeared.

Maybe we have more 'statistic guys' who go from maybe an assistant coach spot to a head coach position. And I don't say, they are not good coaches, but the real kind of teachers of the game, how to do things properly, technically there aren't that many of them around anymore in my opinion.

I know more about the women's side of our game than the men's side, of course, but for me for example, Giovanni Guidetti is a good friend of mine and he is like that kind of guy who knows how to train his players.

There's a reason why he can stay in the same club (Vakifbank) and continue winning year after year.

It's not only about their budget because in the end you just need one bad run and the team management says, okay, it's just not good enough for us anymore, you're out.

It can start locally. You can have someone who is better than you locally, even in your own country. Then start to watch internationally, you take can take small steps and then step by step you learn to develop your own kind of philosophy.

The more knowledge you get, the more you will put things together and you understand where things should be and how you would like things to be.

And then you probably choose to learn from coaches that maybe follow the same philosophy that you're developing and sometimes maybe a totally different one to mix it up a little bit.

Do you have a particular goal? Maybe a goal that you already reached or a goal that is so hard to reach that it gives you daily motivation?

Yeah. I think a goal for me is like this.

I really don't like to put goals on my team that for example we say when the season starts: Oh, now we have to win. We have a good enough team to win or we should win the cup and the league and stuff like this.

Because that, for me, puts a very unnatural kind of pressure inside the whole team environment. Because, if you're going to win, you need a lot of different things to go well.

You need to play good of course. You need a good team. You need to practice well, but you also need to have a portion of luck, if that serve drops down on the right side of the net or not, when it hits the net. You need to have as less injuries as possible, so you can play with your best players most of the season, you know.

And some of those things you cannot control. So in some situations you can even end up being number 2 and you still had a great, great season. And if you have then voiced out that winning is the only thing that counts you are kind of also saying that, okay, the season was a fiasco, that it wasn't good enough.

Like I said, I'm a very technical coach. I like to develop players. That's my thing. And when you add up the quality that you give to each player and bring that into a team, you know, the quality of the way you play should also increase, the way you play should get better and better.

And if you do your job good enough, as a coach and as a player and the cooperation works out, you will win games. And when you win games, in the end you will also win something.

So here in Stuttgart, for example, we will always be one of the favorite teams in the league, for sure. But before the season we said that, okay, we have no goal. We have no goal, we didn't say that we should win the league or that we should win the cup or whatever.

We will try to be as good as possible by what we do on a daily basis with every player. And when we do this good enough, we know that we probably can win something.

But if we don't develop ourselves, if we don't do that, we didn't deserve it to win anything and it would be more some kind of coincidence or luck if we actually win something.

And stay with it also for 8, 9, 10 months, not only for a short period of time.

Team rules. Are there some fixed rules that you put in place?

Of course we have a few fixed rules when it comes to practice, you know, when to be there and what to do, but for the players, I have very few rules.

They have a lot of freedom in their lives because they are grown up women, most of them at least. Of course, the youngest ones, you have to guide like you guide your kids, but you also have to give them the freedom to understand the right and the wrong.

And this is also a 'team responsibility'. If everything is directed by me as a coach, that you cannot do this, you can't do that. You can do this. You can't do that. When it's done in this way, you feel that, that it's something that's forced on you.

And this is something that the team has to understand because the inner kind of justice in the team is so much more important than my voice.

When the teammates starts to speak with one another that we don't do this, we don't do that, this is how we do it here, this is how we do it here....It's much stronger than just my voice, I like that kind of commitment that they need to have to each other.

I don't like coaches that manage 'everything', when you go to away matches everybody has to have the same cap, same gloves, the same jacket, the same hoodie or whatever, you know...I just say honour the sponsors!

If we look like a Christmas tree, if someone wears red, someone blue, someone black while traveling, I don't care. Be comfortable when you're traveling.

But of course, when we practice, before the games and when we prepare for the games then of course we have to be wearing the same stuff, but outside of that we don't care.

The same goes for what you do in your time off, be responsible.

But you should also not mix this up with me being kind or naive, those are two completely different things.

So if you misuse our freedoms. I'm a pretty tough coach also. I'm not the nicest guy on planet Earth, you know, I can also easily take those things away from you.

So I give them that kind of freedom that they understand that, be smart. When you have chosen to be a professional athlete, then you also have some kind of responsibility to yourself.

And if you're not able to do it yourself, okay, then we have to kind of help you, either it's like in a rougher way or a nicer way. That also depends on your age. Of course, someone who is 30 years old, they should understand more than someone who is 17, 18.

I also ask my players to study something small on the side. So you don't just run around and only have volleyball in your head. Because you will always get moments in time, where maybe things are not going so well, or where you're injured. So you need to have something else to think about than just...how did today's practice go?

Have a life outside of volleyball. That's the most important also, you are not like a monk.

So I don't like tons of rules, but during practice time, I'm pretty strict, inside those two and a half, three hours, when we are practicing, then I have my rules and how we do it.

When preparing a new game (next weekend), how does your general approach look like and did you ever change your approach?

No, we kind of stick to the same pattern. It depends a little bit, you know, when you come to a new team, because I am not a coach who would bring with me 5, 6, 7 other coaches or assistants as my own staff.

I think that when I go to Poland, I should work with Polish people. People who know the country, who know the culture. When I'm in Germany, I have a German team. So I never have asked to change the scout man or other things like this.

So yes, I have my ideas, how I would like to have things and we kind of work with this, but also I have had good scoutmen and they kind of say:" okay, but this is how I make it. What do you think about this?"

So some small changes, changes based upon who I've been working with over the years they were made, but the big, big picture is kind of the same.

Like you also know you, you do like two, three sessions with video before the game and you prepare the team. And we mostly do the preparation as a coaching team together, but we also sometimes give the players the responsibility to prepare things, to see what they take out of it and what they find are the important things for the match.

But if we do that, we of course also have our preparation ready in the background as a plan B if we can say like that.

So there are some different ways, but it's all very traditional. Everything is about video and some statistics and what you can get out of it.

But there is also this balance. How much information should you give before a game?

Some opposing teams, you can read like an open book in the way that they play and from the statistics. And some teams are more tricky where you have to kind of force them to play the way you want them to play and use their weaknesses.

So every game, every league, every team has had a kind of different approach, but the big picture stays the same for me.

The future of volleyball, from a technical point of view, how will the game evolve according to your opinion?

Yeah, well, once again, I'm a pretty old guy, so I did kind of grow up with the Arie Selinger mentality of playing with a lot of combinations, a lot of tricky plays but now our game is more evolving towards the men's game.

It's more physical, there's more speed. I think this is going to continue, the physicality also in the women's game will increase and increase.

But I also think that those teams who can kind of bring in a little bit more of the old style of the game can also have some kind of advantage. Because if you bring in something that nobody else practices, it's hard to prepare against.

So we also try to bring in a few things, that we know that our opponent cannot practice, because they don't have the players, they don't have the knowledge about this. So we are kind of tricky to play against it that way.

When it comes to the game I think it will just continue developing, like it has been with a lot of physical improvement and power and this, you see already.

Like you mentioned those three right-side players before in our conversations with Boskovic, Haak and Egonu, you know. If you have Zhu Ting on the outside, you know that the more you get those players on the court, the more brutal that the game will be.

So I think that will continue, but I hope that there will still be room for a more technical revolution also that there's more room for some of the technical part of it.

But let's see, I haven't done big, big thoughts about it, where it will end up. But you see that the physicality is becoming very important.

According to you, what rule change is necessary? And why would you want to see this rule implemented?

I am not a big fan of all these rule changes, I think the rules nowadays are pretty okay. I think it makes the game fluid and I'm ok with that.

There is one rule we had in the United States that season that I was there that I really liked, because like in Germany here now, for example, if you have 13 players, you have to have 2 liberos. And if you have now, as we have, we have one libero who is injured, we have a problem because we have to cut down to not have 14 players in the game, but we can only have 12, so you have to take out players.

There we had this rule that you could pick any other player from your substitute players to put on a yellow vest or something, and they could substitute for the libero, if you needed it. Only for that set, if you were substituted out again, you could not go inside again, like for example, an outside hitter.

But the next set, you could take this vest off and you could still play as an outside hitter.

It sounds a little bit complicated, but it was pretty easy to implement. And it was actually Greg Romano, who was the libero of the American men's national team, who was one of the assistant coaches of the teams in the league, who was telling about how he felt that he was destroying for his own team sometimes when they played a match and he was not having a good match.

He really liked this rule, anybody can be subbed out during the set for any other player, why don't we do this with the libero position?

And that rule I really liked, that was really nice, because you can put someone in and you can use the team a little bit more. Often teams have like a stabilizing player, you know, like an outside hitter who is maybe not so strong spiking wise.

Bu they could do a good job in reception, but they sit out the whole time because you have those power attackers or you have 1 stabilizer and 1 power attacker in the team. You could use your team more and gain benefit from that.

So yeah, that is kind of 1 rule, but outside of this one, I don't spend a lot of time to think about the rules.

Of course when you think about it, when you play, for example, European cups that the golden set is just to 15 points, instead of 25, maybe that is also pretty limiting.

When you fight over 2 matches, 2 long matches, and then you decide over 15 points that you go through or not. You could at least, when you have traveled from Umsk in Russia to Stuttgart or opposite, these long journeys, you could play to 25, like a normal set, that takes like 10 minutes more.

Those things I don't understand. Because if we do it like that it will be a little bit more fair and more exciting.

There are some small things like this, but outside of that, I go with the flow here and my voice will not be heard anyhow. 😀

Best game you've ever seen. What recent or game from the volleyball vaults did validate once more that volleyball is the greatest sport on the globe.

Yes. I actually have a game like this and of course I have seen a lot of good games. You could see the World Club Championship Final between, Vakif and Conegliano, one week ago or so. That was a great game, you know.

But the game that is kind of burned on my mind. I don't remember the year now really exactly. (Volleybrains: "1994")

But it was a World Championship in Brazil for women, when Brazil played against Cuba and Cuba was the team with Carvajal, Torres, Mireya Luis with Regla Bell all those big, big names.

And I remember Carvajal and Torres, they were a wall. I don't know how many block points they made the first set, very impressive.

And that was in the old counting system to 15 points. I think they won the first set 15-2. They killed Brazil completely. I know I had this game on a VHS tape.

I think I destroyed the tape by the number of times I was looking at that game.

I remember the camera was showing how they were pressing over the net in block. I was so impressed because that Brazilian team was also a really good team, but Cuba destroyed them completely.

So that was kind of one of the games that has always stuck in my mind, but of course, I guess if I go back now and look at it now, it will look like a 3rd league game, not so bad of course. 😀

But things develop and evolve and at least at that time it made a big impression on me.

I was traveling around a lot, like I said, and I was always in Montroux on the Montroux Volley Master tournaments and those teams always came there, that's where I met Giovanni Guidetti like over 20 years.

Where me and him were driving around in Montroux in his car to the gym up in the mountain then back to the main stadium and watching teams practicing and asking 'can we come in?'

Cuba was there and the United States and Brazil, and those big teams. Where we kind of started out and we were still young and handsome, you know. 😀

Which characteristics should a high level performing volleyball player have?

Of course you need to have some talent, but you know that hard work beats talent everyday if you give them the same kind of opportunity.

I would rather like to work with the players a little less skilled and really wanting it, than to have someone who is a little bit better skilled that comes to practice and think that they know everything.

So for me, if I should choose something really simple and easy, I would say that I really would like to go after, what shall I say, the ambitious players, the ones with the right attitude, because it's about coming every day to work and wanting to do something and have fun in what you're doing, you know.

Challenging yourself, instead of me trying to force people to play. Some players, they play for the money and their attitude is, so and so, and it's a big difference in that way.

If you can make the strongest 'starting six' in the world, right now. What would your team look like?

Well, I was thinking about this, of course. It's not so, so easy, you know.

I think on the setters position, Maja Ognjenovic, which is a great, great, great setter. I had the luck and honor to be her coach for a season in Poland that's a good setter, you know, with her magic hands.

Of course I know Asia Wolosz from Conegliano from my time in Poland and I'm really impressed on how she kind of has found her way through the years, you know, from playing in Bielsko to Busto, I think it was and back to Police and now back to Italy again. And she's running that team with a lot of great players, so one of those two can be my setter, Asia is younger than Maja, so they can play together, I think.

Right side, of course you have those, those three you mentioned with Boskovich, who is great. Egonu who is great, Haak.

I pick Haak, because I have to support my Swedish friends here. We got something great from Scandinavia, I have to pick her, she's a great girl and a great player and she's the youngest of those 3. So I trust on it that she'll continue developing.

The middle I think Eda Erdem, the Turkish is really good. I like Robin de Kruijf, I think she is a good player and I would to add Folie. So those three in a combination, if I can make, not only a starting six, but if I would compose an entire team.

Yeah, outside hitters, of course you have tons of players, but Zhu Ting in her best shape. And I choose to take Gabi because I think that every team needs a stabilizing player and that kind of motor and then De Gennaro as the libero.

So I think that would be a pretty 'okay' team in the end of the day. (Volleybrains: "Maybe you will win some games"😀)

Yeah. I think we will win some games. 😀

If you could have a gigantic billboard anywhere with anything on it — metaphorically speaking, getting a message out to every athlete on the globe — what would it say and why?

I don't have something like this honestly. There was one thing many years ago when I was coaching in Schwerin.

We were kind of the favorites to win the league. We had a good team. We started off like s**t, to be honest. And we were not dealing good with this kind of pressure.

And at the same time I was reading a biography by Johan Cruyff, the famous soccer player.

And this is kind of my philosophy. If you want to win, you also have to dare to take risks.

You're not gonna be great, being safe all the time or being in your comfort zone. If you're gonna make a difference, you also have to dare to shoot. You cannot just pass the ball back and forth.

So this is the kind of quote where I live by as a coach, that the players should really also go for it. I don't like it when players hold back, play safe, if it's to get decent statistics or they don't dare or whatever it is.

Of course we are working a lot on decision-making, you know, like red light, green light to be smart.

I'm also a little bit more like this crazy guy you also have to have this touch off N'Gapeth or whatever you can call it, take a risk to reap the result.

Players need to develop knowing when to 'go for it'. How do you go about that?

We work with the players on call decision making based on the situation they are in.

For example, if you're going to serve and you're going to serve a jump float serve or if you serve like a jump serve, a spin serve, if you see or feel that the toss is not really, really good then that should be a red light situation, where you have to understand that, okay, now I have to focus more on the technical part. Just keep the ball in play instead of just hammering the ball in the middle of the net or 10 meters out, what you would call like a 'bad mistake'.

Attacking wise it's the same, how do you solve situations? When can you tip in position three? When can you hit touch block out? When can you do a power tip? When can you spike diagonal?

Green lights for those situations, red lights for those. So we work on those situations because they are crucial.

You don't spike 10 times out diagonal, just because you like to spike diagonal. When you maybe play against a team that plays perimeter defense, you can keep the ball in three and if you don't score the point, you will make a smart system situation where you can move the blockers over, you can play a good double, triple block.

Maybe you took out the right side. Maybe you took out the setter, maybe you took out the outside hitter by that tip. You know?

It's also about that you need to try to make the opponent worse than they are, they have to play how you want them to play.

So this is part of the game, because many times if you just go head to head with higher level opponents, if you just try to solve it by power it's not enough.

We try to do this because this is also helping to develop players, be smarter, make better decisions, understand the game.

Because like we spoke about earlier, in the end of the day, this is the thing that is gonna make you better in a quicker way, working on the technical stuff.

And suddenly you are taking big, big steps forward, even pretty average players will develop themselves.

What is an unusual habit or an absurd thing that you love?

I don't think I'm very special in that way. I'm not like Jose Mourinho, I'm not the special one. I'm like Jurgen Klopp, I'm the normal one. 😀

I have nothing that has a really special meaning to me. I really like to be well prepared for everything I do.

There is not one practice I can remember in 10 - 15 years that I have not prepared upfront before I go to practice.

I never go to practice and say:"Okay. Uh, what do we do today?" This is not my style, but of course I have to adjust my practices sometimes, maybe even after half an hour.

So I don't follow my practice preparation every day, but I like to be prepared. I like to know what we should do and what we are working on.

And that it's all inside our weekly plan and according to the opponents that we are playing against. But I don't think that's pretty special.

How has a failure, or apparent failure, set you up for later success? Do you have a “favorite failure” of yours?

Yeah, of course there are failures. There are situations where I know that I should have done things differently.

Of course you learn by being older and wiser also.

But my personality is that I am not a very, very good politician. 😀

When I come to a new club, I'm like, if you're the president of that club, yes you're the president, but don't mess with my work.

If you disagree with me, you can coach on Monday instead of me, if you have such a strong opinion about things. So I had a couple of situations where I know that I could have maybe been more level headed and maybe being able to use that moment or those situations a little bit better.

But luckily I will say that in 98% of the times I have always left clubs with a good feeling, I have never gotten into big trouble. I have remained friends with everybody.

So when I go back to my old clubs around in Europe, I am always welcomed a warm way.

It's always nice to see the people in Schwerin, being the coach of Stuttgart now, which was and is, their biggest rival.

They think still I'm a nice guy. Well at least they treat me like this. 😀

This goes back to being a genuine person. Leading by example as a coach and mentor.

I think also that one of the most important things about being a coach is that you really have to be authentic.

You have to find your own way and like I said, for me, knowledge is power.

Get better by getting knowledge, have confidence in what you're doing, because if you're not confident as a coach, your players are not stupid, they figure it out very, very quickly.

There are many coaches who are kind of arrogant and they hide themselves behind their strict rules and 'we have to do this and you can not do that'. And they kind of keep the team down by their rules.

For me, it's more like this, that I hope that I have the respect and the trust from our players because they know that I'm a good coach and they see that I know what I'm doing.

I really try to make them understand that on and off the court, I'm a completely different guy. When I sit here talking with you right now I'm a pretty normal guy. I'm pretty cool.

(Volleybrains: "😀")

But when I'm on practice sometimes I can be the biggest idiot and asshole on planet earth.

If I think that things should be in a certain way, it's not always nice to play for me. I know it's really difficult to play for me at times because I'm very demanding towards my players, I ask a lot of them, but I also tell them, I never ask you to do things that I know you cannot do.

But I also know that when some of my players think that they have reached their limit, that they sometimes got more in them.

So as a coach, you need this kind of confidence and you need to believe in yourself.

We are adjusting for the players. Some players are good in this, some players are good in that, because of different physical abilities, their responsibility towards themselves, their position inside the team...

Because if you are a coach who is "changing all the time"... for example, that now you start with your setters and say that, okay, this is the way I would like you to set. And then you suddenly see someone who does it completely different and you think, wow, this is kind of good. And you come back the next season. And you tell them, this is the way you have to set now.

Then me as a setter, I would say:"What's up, did you teach us the wrong thing now last year?"

As the game develops, it's for sure necessary to keep up with the changes that will happen, better be ready for them.

This is the thing. And that's why I say that this quote for me: knowledge is power. This is so important. That's why I started with that.

My advice for young coaches is: go out there, travel and use your money instead of going crazy in Mallorca or Tenerife going barhopping in the summer, use your money travel to Ze Roberto in Brazil or go to Giovanni Guidetti or anyone else... Avital Selinger.

I'm so grateful to those coaches who I could go to and I could ask and I could share with.

It could be anybody, also a 'nobody coach' in Japan where I know from that this guy is just a really good developer of players. And I know that the Japanese style is not like the European style, but I also know that, okay, if we can play defense like the Japanese, we can spike like the Italians, we can block like the Russians and we can do this, this and this, and we can put this together. We will look pretty decent.

So I would like to know, how do they do it, what are the reasons why they do what they do?

I never went to the World Championships or the Olympic games or the European Championships for years, when my friends went there, I went 2 months to Japan.

I was sitting in some kind of gym there watching practice, helping out in 40 degrees Celsius and 96% humidity while drinking green tea, that was my life.

And I'm so grateful for this. So my advice is basicly, learn from the best ones, you know, that's the way that you find your own way.

Do you have a book that you like a lot? Or do you have other resources that you want to share?

When it comes to volleyball books, I have worne out the Power Volleyball by Arie Selinger and the serve receive book from Toshi Yoshida.

Outside of volleyball I mostly read crime books, especially the Norwegian author Jo Nesbø. He comes from my home town and is one of the best selling in the world.

I also like some basketball coaching books from Phil Jackson and Pat Riley.

When you feel overwhelmed or unfocused, or have lost your focus temporarily, what do you do?

Well, that's a little bit hard to answer in a way, because each situation kind of lives its own life. If I can describe it like this.

But for me it's to put things in perspective, like we spoke about, I have more difficult things in my life than winning and losing a game of volleyball.

We have a couple of rules inside of the team.

The first thing is that we have to learn how to win and lose. How you handle those situations is crucial because winning also needs to be learned. It's a good thing have repeat wins week after week, but it's not like it will come by itself because you know also that after winning a certain number of games, you start to get unfocused.

But inside the team when we're winning or losing, we have this rule, that we call the "24 hour rule".

It's that you are allowed to be happy or sad for 24 hours. But after 24 hours, it's back to work.

Then it's a new game, a new situation, because nothing is history as quick as a result in sports, you get nothing more from it after these hours that have passed.

It's done, it's dusted off, you know? So this is something that I try to live by.

Just continue with what you're doing.

But of course working as a coach is very special. You have your assistant coaches, you can lean on them, but you also need to work with those guys over years to have that kind of trust that they really dare to say to you what they think, because you're the head coach, they have this respect for you, but there also needs to be trust between each other.

So when you go to a new team, it takes a little bit of time before these kind of things are built. So you're very often very alone especially in times that things are not going so well.

So this is the thing that you have to learn.

Another game is around the corner, you cannot be affected on what is said or written. Online or in newspapers. I try to stay away from all those things.

It only leaks a lot of energy, because at the end of the day, the only thing that counts is the work that you do with your players in practice every single day.

That is the thing what can make changes, make things better.

If someone praises you up in the sky or kicks you down in the dirt. I try to stay away from those things as much as possible. And don't get disturbed by things outside of my control.

Thank you, Tore.



