===== SESSION: https://volleybrains.com/davide-mazzanti/ =====

----- VIDEOS -----
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=L7a8gg1xACU
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lUYJ43bZelg
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZBqRES1cn94
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8Y0lbYT8Cd4
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jxLVHs83hcQ
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Y2Sdr6L_LR4
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AzUqeue4Qds
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-8fvKeNzMOA
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WbGA0BsJpp8
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vGu3Mwm0ezA
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=abEZugGMNR0
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bfl2dDBqjpU
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fbKLiYoqbHk
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-7dFqlFE17s
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=y42gl1ILbBs

----- TEXTO -----
35. Davide Mazzanti:"Respecting yourself and those around you, that is the key."

In this Masterclass we feature Davide Mazzanti. Davide is the head coach of the Italian female national team since 2017 and guided them to obtain the European Championship gold medal in 2021, on the home court of that other European powerhouse, Serbia.

For the last 20 years Davide has been coaching at the highest Italian level in club teams or worked for the Italian volleyball federation. Next to the successes with the national team he also obtained 3 Italian Championships with his club teams.

In this extended interview you'll find Davide talking about his coaching framework that he is continuously improving, about what he changed in his coaching over the last few years and why, about changing his way to set objectives for his athletes and about so much more.

You'll find 13 original video clips in this article.

Enjoy!

Enter Davide...

Davide, why did you decide to become a professional volleyball coach? What pushed you towards that decision?

Before I wanted to be a coach, I wanted to become a teacher. I had enrolled in engineering and wanted to teach electronics because it was a subject which I wanted to pass on to others.

Electronics was what made me fall in love with teaching. I had a very good professor during high school, who made me fall in love with that subject and I told myself I wanted to do the same with my life.

Soon after I understood that the thing that I loved was making someone fall
in love with a certain subject matter. 🙂

And as I was struggling a bit with the actual mathematics. Probably it wasn't my greatest talent.

One day I went to see a practice of the junior national team, in a place near where I grew up. And there I saw a coach, Angelo Lorenzetti, coaching this group of juniors, kids that were all my age.

And there I understood two things; that I could never play at the highest level because I could recognize the gap that existed between my own qualities as a player and what I saw there.

And that I should start my coaching journey.

I bought all the instructional videotapes of all these coaches, I studied a lot but I had convinced myself of one thing; that I would never be able to reach the level of these top coaches.

Because I could see that my way of doing things, was very different from what most coaches were doing and therefore as I saw them as my rolemodels, I thought I had no hope or at least no way to reach their level.

I did however get many opportunities to confront myself with the highest level, so in a way my career progressed very quickly.

I met people who brought me immediately in the Serie A and from there also immediately in the national team, but it still wasn't that obvious to me even when I became the assistant coach of the national team that this was my calling.

And then I arrived at a moment where I saw that I had many insights, lots of new ideas, and that those ideas kind of worked. Well at that point I saw that it could work, it could work even with my own style, with my way of working.

And so let's say that it's not like I decided to become a head coach.

I slowly discovered that I could do it, I really had no idea I could actually do it.

What advice would you give yourself as a starting coach? An advice that is so clear and logic for you now, but that you had to develop over the years.

The advice that I would give myself is not to ponder too hard on 'why things happen'.

For example when you are younger you'll have people that see something in you and they choose to invest in you, but you are not able to realise why they do that or what it is that they see in you.

Asking those questions to yourself is useless. I would tell myself to question less and to live in a more sound an natural manner.

Do you have a particular goal? Maybe a goal that you already reached or a goal that is so hard to reach that it gives you daily motivation?

In the end my goal is to empower people so they can express themselves in their best way possible.

I have focused a lot on the things I need to be able to put the people in these conditions.

And then in my system, which is very organized, I have more precisely defined what the aspects are that I want to improve.

I have created my own system of organizing my job and I took the word 'S.P.O.R.T.' as an acronym for the five elements which are strategy, priority, order, results and theory.

And for each of those I have defined their specific environment. And let's say that after the Olympics and after the European Championships I have made it more clear what the actual priorities are, because I think that's where a big part of my job is actually situated.

So I'm trying to better define these priorities.

And the other thing I'm working on is the theory of things. For me in the "theory" all values are collected.

And I believe that from a cultural perspective us Italians we are very good at everything that is a reaction.

When we are struggling, we are great at creating "something".

We are less good, in my opinion when we have to somehow confirm ourselves on things or performances that we achieved in the past.

And so I'm trying to figure out what are the elements that lead me to be as effective as possible in maintaining that level.

And so I'm working on the level of my own competencies, the ones I need to keep with me and the ones that I need to have in the gym.

These are the two elements I work on the most.

No, a great and a profound answer. You made me think of at least 10 new questions though.

The 5 points that you mentioned, where do they come from? These are subjects which are of great importance to yourself? If you have found these 5, let's say you could also find 8.

From a lot of different inputs actually.

They are the result of the synthesis that I have made over time and over time I have tried to organize: "what to do", let's say the rules that you want to give to your team.

And in my opinion there what is important are the priority and the order, the "who does what" in your team.

And how do you want to organize your team from a rules perspective. But also what then becomes the actual planning of a season.

And in my opinion these first two elements here, are the two elements that are necessary, but not sufficient to win.

But without these you don't go anywhere and so let's say that these here are; if we take a pyramid, they are the foundation of the pyramid. So that was "what to do".

Then strategy and results are the "how I train".

So in the pyramid they are in the middle and they are about both the whole idea of strategy, so how I want to make the team play. But also managing all that is called "data", concerning the results, regarding what each athlete's goals are and how I want to make them better. So this is the section of "how I want to train them".

And then there is the top of the pyramid, which is the theory. And that's "the why", why do we do it.

And over the years I've seen that I was able to better synthesize these five points, to enrich my pyramid more and more.

The rule is that when I'm in a state of grace when I have good insights, well
then I can enrich the system.

When I'm struggling, I will just read it, I will try to make the choices within the entire strategy.

And I figured out that with a system as organized as this one, that it is easier to add something, to add new input, new behaviours. Maybe on how to manage the communication with the staff, on how to improve the communication with the
athletes... I think this framework is helpful to have. I think that every coach has a system, maybe a bit more or a bit less defined than mine.

The way I am though, the more I can define it, the more in check I will feel.

Team rules. Are there some fixed rules that you put in place? Technical/volleyball related or organisational.

I am someone who has never put up too many rules.

But I think they are still necessary.

And even if they are necessary, you can put up 3 or 100 rules, but the ones you agree on they must be respected. That's the most important part of it. 🙂

At times it becomes an aspect that I need to delegate. In the sense of, if we talk about the entire code of conduct of our team and if that would be my sole responsibility, that would take a lot of attention and energy away from my training.

This past year we have structured the overall management a bit better, with people who deal with just that.

Also because it is an increasingly complex world where we live in, because it's not just about a code of conduct for the gym.

But there's a code of conduct, even related maybe to social media posting, to everything that has to do with the athlete's image also.

It is more complex now and therefore to handle this complexity we have people who are responsible for that. They need to intervene whenever something goes wrong.

So from that standpoint, yes, we have some rules in place.

But I'm someone who tends to never needs to do something the same as the day before, changing stuff is how I work. I am trying to improve a bit there also, because I saw that in this quest of continuous improvement I started to lose some important pieces that I needed to keep, instead of changing them.

So the work I'm doing this year is to look at what has happened and not to change my ways, but to put it all back together and organize my ideas in the best possible way.

And the other thing I'm changing in the management of our athletes. Is on the subject of goal setting, because I am not satisfied with how we handle that.

Every time we are taken by the fact that we focus so much on our goals and I've seen over time, that the goal more than it is a goal, it becomes a problem for an athlete.

It is not seen as a pebble in their shoe, but as a huge boulder. 🙂

And so I'm looking to change the model of organizing our goals, not through a codified system, but through self-assessment.

So based on what is the pebble in that athlete's shoe, the issue that doesn't allow
them not to play but something that is annoying, something annoying that they want to remove.

So not something that is extremely limiting, but something that is annoying.

And we'll create a self-assessment, not necessarily connected to a number that they have to reach, but that it can be a feeling, a behavior, an attitude.

So the term of evaluation of that improvement is left to the athlete, not to the coach.

And that I think is the only thing that is very different this coming season from anything I've ever done.

I'm studying up on it because I think when something doesn't satisfy you, well you have to change it.

And this was one of those things that I didn't like about our athlete management.

An interesting question now is how did you notice that one of your athletes was feeling a higher load of pressure because of mismatched objectives or any other way. And is there an example of a situation that you can give. Without naming names.

Because I realize that when you give a goal, beyond that you have to monitor it, as a coach you have to make your attention felt, otherwise the goal falls apart.

But the athlete also needs ownership of that goal. And to stimulate the self ownership we are trying this new method. As you know there is a fine line between something being or becoming a problem and it being a goal, a direction.

For example in the national team we have athletes that have been labeled by others.

"This middle can't block, that hitter can't receive."

And sometimes I realize that they are labels which are very difficult to remove and by putting the focus on that label, that issue, well that's really the worst thing you can do.

As to say that without that thing I am not capable of playing at a high level. And
in my opinion we must be careful about these things. When that label already is a problem.

And if I put the focus on the problem I risk to put my athlete in an even more difficult spot.

According to me we have to try to see if there is a different way to confront that situation, maybe letting it run a little bit, not giving it too much weight in that moment and to focus on something else.

And I think the athlete's own awareness is the first thing that can help them.

But if that awareness instead arises from a prejudice, it is difficult to remove it. So the difficulty is exactly that, to not go down that road.

I don't know how it is in male volleyball, but I can say that in female volleyball these things happen a lot.

There is this duality of course in our game, a player is on the court because we expect a certain level of efficiency in attack and another, different level of efficiency in reception or back row play.  We also know that the player often times feeds off their more apparent skill to perform well in their secondary skill.

Everyone works in their own way, but if I for example am more of an attacker
then that I'm a blocker, well in the end if my attack is working, maybe I can even get a few blocks in, but if my attack does not go, then it is impossible that I'll get my blocking going.

So with that in mind, it might make sense to focus on the strengths rather than on something that needs more work, just to rebalance it.

I have also experienced this myself. I played at a low level and I did not know how to receive well. But when my attack was going well, I could receive some balls.

Without my attack though, my receiving became useless. 😀

The future of volleyball, from a technical point of view, how will the game evolve according to your opinion?

What I'm seeing is that, concerning women's volleyball, that it is following a bit the evolution of the men's game.

Male volleyball always arrives a bit in advance if we look at how the game evolves.

This can relate to the speed of the game, starting to use the backrow 'pipe' attack, making the serve, a fundamental skill and so on.

There are so many things that men's volleyball discovered first. And in my opinion, women's volleyball arrives to it in different stages, but not because we are late, but because it needs to follow upon the intrinsic physical qualities of our girls.

We are starting to be able, on our net height, to do what the boys do. Because the physical qualities in the last ten years, also our own physical performance monitoring shows that exact thing, they are definitely increasing.

And that's going to bring, in my opinion, as it has always been an adjustment towards men's volleyball, always a little slower, a little later.

It will of course never actually arrive to that level.

But I think there are already a lot of things we've incorporated.

The zone six, back row attack, was one that was not effective before. It's gotten more importance now, even though the men also use it in their side-out, we use it only in the transition phase or much more in the transition phase.

The serve starts to be something that is not yet at the male level, because it will never get there. But the speed we are beginning to reach with the spin serves start to be closer. Also the fact of the float serve that we're not using that much anymore, we are more using hybrid serves, which the men also use.

So in so many aspects the speed of the game is approaching men's volleyball.  We may never have the same anticipation that the male middle spikers have to take
the ball out of the setters hands. But also there we're getting closer and closer.

I don't know if over time we will lose the fast/ the slide, because we will have more opposites like Boskovich, like Egonu or spikers of this caliber.

So maybe at a high level, you'll start to see less use or sense in the slide attack. I don't know if this progression will bring us closer to boys.

But I see a continuous adjustment towards men's volleyball.

According to you, what rule change is necessary?

I want them to be defined better, because sometimes there is a margin of interpretation and when there is a certain margin of interpretation there is no rule, it doesn't exist.

I think there are two things where I think we can be a little bit more specific.

On the concept of the double touch. Because now, for example, it happens that in the youth leagues if the ball makes a half rotation, they whistle.

And if you watch the Serie A, even if you take De Cecco or Bruno, well the ball rotates plenty and often.

We need to better define that rule. Because if we don't, it stays a struggle.

Very often in volleyball they implement a rule change during the actual course of the season, which also isn't beneficial.

In beach volleyball it happened that a ball that was previously not a foul became a foul during the Olympics.

So you prepare for the event of your lifetime, you arrive there and they change the rule. Sorry, but that is not possible.

For example, in indoor volleyball it happened with the rotation mistake. In general in men's volleyball they are better at complying to this rule. In women's volleyball, it's the far west.

Everyone does as they please.

So the middle leaves 'half an hour' earlier and then now with this different rotation 1, the opposite leaves '1 hour' early to get to the other side. We do our rotation 1 and everyone asks me why do we do it this way? With Paola starting in the middle...well, because we don't want to steal time.

Because if she started running differently she would steal time. So to not steal she starts there.

But on these aspects here in my opinion it's not about changing them, it's about defining them better and especially to not get the crazy idea to change things before an important event.

At the European Championships when we arrived there they told us, 'now we are going to be strict on rotation mistakes.'

We told them: 'So all of you will whistle them in the same way? I am happy if you'll do that, because half of the teams don't respect this rule." You didn't know any more what they are looking at though, it was a mess.

They reevaluated it now, fixed it a little bit.

So in my opinion, it's just that.

On the international level we also see that the same exact rule is judged differently with the men's versus how it's handled with the women...

For example, there is this talk about holding the ball.

In men's volleyball, all the balls that are pushed and are the subject of many discussions, like it happened at the last World Cup, where even Velasco got mad about these two balls in a row against Argentina...

With the men this pushed ball doesn't get whistled, with the women it does.

I tried to figure out why.

And according to the referees, it's because the girls catch the ball too much, having perhaps smaller hands than the boys.

They take the ball more in their hand and guide it more.

Okay, I can live with that.

In my opinion though, it still gets measured a little different than that.

It's very strict for the girls, it's very liberal with the guys and also on this in my opinion, we need a rule that is not interpretable.

It needs to be more clear. The referee of course still must be able to do their job, they need to be able do some interpretation.

But in my opinion, right now, there are two different methods of evaluating.

Davide, according to you, if we want our sport to grow, what would be needed for that?

In my opinion the rally point system fits nicely with both the fact that it's easier to televise and it made volleyball easier to understand.

That change was very handy and I wouldn't make any further experiments with that.

The only thing that I would do is to try to figure out how to make our sport even more appealing, because we have a lot of downtime. We should use those moments better.

I think the technology could be leveraged to make these downtimes even more appealing.

Like knowing, perhaps after each action, rather than only the possibility to review it, but also seeing how high the athlete jumped, where they took the ball, where...

So to enrich the game even more, with everything that is going on.

We aren't soccer, where the ball never stops and so there is always a certain level of spectacle.

We have a lot of downtime in which we can enrich our sport so much. And I think we should do more of that.

I wouldn't change at thing, but I would just want to add more.

Best game you've ever seen. What recent or game from the volleyball vaults did validate once more that volleyball is the greatest sport ever.

Honestly in my head, I don't have a game like that.

I have a training session in my head though, where I felt powerful for the first time, I really felt 'powerful' there for the first time. 😀

It was at a middle school in Bergamo. They had sent me there to do promotional activities, when I was the assistant coach in Bergamo.

So in that school, they didn't know what volleyball was in those days.

We did our demo and I must say that I did my best to involve the entire school in that training session.

And in one of the last actions where we had happen a defense, a set, a nice attack... which I never thought would happen knowing how we had started out, but I remember the standing ovation from the entire school after that action happened.

And maybe when you play a game in our normal environement that action is one of the most normal things, however to have created that situation, that was something particular, especially to hear the entire school explode over what had happened is something that I remember most.

And it's probably the first time where I felt... not 'strong or powerful' but it felt like I had been very incisive. To have put these people in that situation.

So not a game, but that practice session always stayed with me.

If you would have the ability to put together the world's most performing volleyball player. Which characteristics would they have.

The first characteristic that comes to mind is the desire to learn. As a first characteristic.

Because I struggle a bit when people tell me: "But I've
always done it this way."

In a world that is so selective and competitive, if every time you say:"I have always done it like this." Your career will last two years and you'll already be out.

In two years you really risk being out in a selective setting, like a national team, if you are not open to improvement.

And that is one that I want to put out as the first characteristic.

About more technical characteristics. I mean I struggle because I would have to go maybe very deep into each position. So it would be more difficult to explain how these characteristics would balance out.

Something that I like a lot in my players, even though it is maybe my projection, so not all players necessarily have to be like this.

But I like it when a player is autonomous, when you have the possibility to make a person autonomous.

That they don't need you to figure out if they did something right or wrong.

It's a nice objective to have for us coaches, though again over time I became to realise that this is more my own projection and that sometimes players like to be led instead.

They aren't all leaders, but there are also 'wingmen' and they perhaps in their own kind of autonomy need some extra guidance.

If you can make the strongest 'starting six' in the world, right now. What would your team look like? Why did you choose these players?

All the players come to mind who I admired and watched when I started to play.

The first one who comes to mind is Joel Despaigne. Because I started watching volleyball around that period of the World Cup of 1990.

And even if we (Italy) won, just to see one player basicly competing against six Italians, in that final set he probably spiked every ball, I have to say that he definitely deserves a spot in my starting six.

I feel I'll struggle to fit a starting six together with the players that I like...let me think. 😀

We had Carlao playing at Parma. He impressed me. And I loved seeing Fefe De Giorgi play when he was at Falconara. A regular sized human among giants, that was something special.

Samuele Papi, because he was another one of these regular sized players among giants.

So I mentioned an opposite, a setter, a middle and a position 4 spiker.

Another middle player that I tried to imitate when they had put me in the middle was Gravina, I really liked Pasquale Gravina a lot.

And perhaps to close out this starting six, Bernardi, because I liked his technique so much and I remember that when I used to go to and practice, he was the one who I tried to imitate most, even though I never succeeded.

A libero, I think I definitely need a French one, because they always blew me away.

From Henno to Exiga, Grebennikov.

I have a hard time choosing one of them because they are also very different. Because Henno didn't move an inch for example, but was very effective.

One is never moving, the other never stands still. I struggle to choose, I go with Henno.

And to not stress myself out, I will only do a men's team and not a women's one.😀

Do you have a book that you like a lot? Which lessons did you get out of it?

Of course, I have a lot of books that I like.

We actually have some kind of 'Mastermind' going, it's like a study group of kinds. There are a lot of different people in there, there is a biomechanics expert in it, strength and conditioning experts, also Marco Meoni is in there for example.

We share a few paragraphs that we think are interesting for each other, maybe a link to an article or a name of a book.

My difficulty is of course that I'm not speaking English very fluently and that I'm not really understanding it well enough to grasp the entire idea behind most concepts that are shared in English.(but I'm studying, I'll get there😀)

I know full well that the most important, most recent literature comes out first in the English language of course.

There are a lot of books that I would like to read in their original language, but let's get a better grasp on the English language first.

One of the latest books that I enjoyed was 'L'antifragilita' from the Italian author Vercelli.

He's the psychologist of the Juve soccer team, I liked that book a lot.

Ah, I thought you would say 'Antifragility' by Nassim Taleb...

Well, that's exactly what it is about though.

Vercelli expanded on Taleb's book and tried to go a bit deeper on some stuff, more clear on other things. He tried to make a version 2.0 out of it.

He adapted it towards a pro sports environment or?

Yes, more or less...you know how we Italians like to use acronyms for everything. 😀

He named his concept 'SFERA' (Translation = Globe).

Which stands: Sincronia (synchronicity), Forza (power/strength), Energia (energy), Ritmo  (rhythm) and Attivazione (activation/ reactiveness)

So he covers the orginal concepts and places them in these different categories.

When preparing a new game, how does your general approach look like and did you ever change your approach? Why did you change and was the outcome beneficial?

Yes, we changed a lot of things and even more since I'm coaching the Italian national team.

The games that we play in those international tournaments follow each other up very rapidly, it's not like we have 3-4 days to prepare a game.

I know very well that when we as coaches to video sessions that we see a lot and that we talk a lot and at the end of the session we have maybe mentioned 15 - 16 items where we gave importance to and now the athletes need to figure out what is of real importance and what isn't. And they have to remember it also, well we all know that that doesn't work.

So it's my job to create a single theme, the concept where all together we'll work hard for on during that game.

Of course there are still hints and clues that he have found when preparing the game. Also these findings we'll share during the game preparation, if a player is scoring a lot of points  on us, how we'll try to manipulate the game, so that's where we'll go over also.

And then on the last page on our scouting report we go over a few details per role.

So my middles need to remember this, setters that, ...etc

We do a 30min video session, but in the end it's about the 'overall' theme and these details per role, nothing more.

That information is what the athletes can use.

The last few years we added a probability simulation. It's a system that has been developed by a couple of engineers, where we use all the stats that are available and we can test different rotations or formations with it.

We use this system to find the 'best' rotations possible.

We even did a few 'simulation battles' with this system between the coaches of the Italian Serie A.

I've seen those video's on YouTube...

Yes, exactly, we did a couple of video's on that system.

And the datasets aren't only the Italian stats right, you also use them in the international games?

Exactly, so basically an example is this one:

You have a middle blocker that you know(well the data knows) who has a high quality serve and looks for the 'conflict zone' between zone 5 and 6. So the system starts to rotate through your starting lineup to figure out, not what you have to do to win, BUT where your probability of winning is highest based on the % that will come out of the simulation

Of course, it's important to realise as with every simulation that it only takes one variable to change and you can throw your simulation in the trash. 🙂

If you could have a gigantic billboard anywhere with anything on it — metaphorically speaking, getting a message out to every athlete on the globe — what would it say and why?

The word that is going through my head right now is respect.

And respect can mean a lot of things.

Understanding what is happening around you, understanding the impact that you can have on yourself and on everything that is surrounding you. Being an athlete and respecting yourself and to show respect to the people around you.

Another thing about respect that is important to acknowledge is the respect that you should have for what has happened in the past.

Being a pro athlete right now is harder than it was a few years ago. Right now as a talented player you get thrown on stage and there is more pressure than there used to be.

Every social or other media outlet is looking for these new talent because they need to push content.

Respect also means, that what we do and think that that shouldn't depend on how others react or comment towards us.

For example, the Olympic games go bad, a lot of critique arises and it seems like it's a tragedy.

If at a later moment, when we are victorious, we react to that previous critique ...well I don't think that does any good to anybody.

We want to go for a correct way of communicating and a reasonable valuation of our performance. In that moment it's our responsibility to show how we want to be respected and that doesn't happen through a form of retaliation.

Having respect for yourself and the people around you is one of my principles and the key of being an athlete of the highest level.

How has a failure, or apparent failure, set you up for later success? Do you have a “favorite failure” of yours?

The 'best defeat of my life' has been being fired at Piacenza in 2013. In 2013 I was almost confirmed to be the coach of the National team. And at the same time I coached Piacenza, which was a great club team.

Within a month I was fired and I was taken off the National Team coaching list.

Plus Piacenza has won five consecutive titles after I had to leave there.

It was very, very hard, because I thought I had thrown everything away in a single second.

I always said that it was the most important failure of my life.

I think the Tokyo Olympics overcame that feeling though through the level of pain, through all the difficulty that accompanied it.

I still don't know if that latest failure will be the 'best failure', though...because we need to see what will come now.

A lot of stuff happened after that defeat, yes we also became European Champs.

We'll see how this story develops. 🙂

In the last five years, what new belief, behaviour, or habit did you instil and why?

Something has changed but for the worst not for the better. 😀

In the last five years I have drastically decreased my sportive activities and everything related to my self care. So for the worst and I'll need to catch up with more workouts.

In our gym, there it occurred to me that I've been chasing the idea for almost five years of my ideal projection for each athlete. A projection being, how I see that player and what I deem is within their future capabilities.

That is my projection though, not the athlete's own projection.

And I saw that by doing that, that it led me a little bit astray.

Because it's one thing to have confidence in the characteristics and the capabilities of that person. Another thing though is projecting it towards that person, through the vision of your own for that person and not always this point of view is the same as what the player is living or understanding.

And I've realised that by recurring to this vision I've sometimes gotten lost.

This is the habit that I changed over the past five years. Because it was not in line with my ideas.

It was not in line with what I really want to do.

Thank you, Davide.

Extra:

If you are an Italian native speaker, you'll find a lot of value in this TED talk that Davide presented. (YouTube has gotten better at auto translating Italian into English, you can try it, but it's not on point yet)



