===== SESSION: https://volleybrains.com/dave-shondell/ =====

----- VIDEOS -----
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9VlS8LR9KD4
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-JsoZ31p-6s
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1DMN6rd3kgc
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_yzyxBaV5JM
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FCBmfaJk9BI
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=r8MFT-BXpio
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=P2Z1FEJXRJ0
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=axk5SRsDAtA
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xFdi0WLRv98
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LCB1zdaOXz8
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-2br20cYoMw
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jFUfD4ZbQtY
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UB-yFj1sSJg
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6_xaqXAfbMM
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=coqZKOYkTsU
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HKKZXnwczMo
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xgLub2bNwfE
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=d9HM82dGHsc

----- TEXTO -----
38. Dave Shondell:'High expectations demands tremendous responsibility'

In this Masterclass we feature Dave Shondell. Dave is the head coach of Purdue University and a 2 times Big Ten head coach of the year. Together with his staff he firmly secured Purdue volleyball to be among one of the best programs in the United States.

We at volleybrains thoroughly enjoyed our conversation with Dave, you'll find out that he is a true promotor of our game.

Dave talks about the future of male and female volleyball, how he goes about making recruits feel a part of Purdue's program, how he changed as a coach over the last years and why, how he goes about preparing his team for the next game and so, so much more.

There are 17 subtitled video clips (45 minutes in total) in this Masterclass.

Enjoy!

Enter Dave.

Dave, why did you decide to commit to being a professional volleyball coach? What pushed you towards that decision?

Well, I grew up in a volleyball family.

My father was one of the real pioneers of the game in this country. He started the men's volleyball program at Ball State University. Ball State and UCLA were the first two men's programs in the United States. He was also a professor of physical education.

So I grew up around all these teachers and coaches. I watched my dad be so positive and enjoy life so much. And then I had an older brother who was three and a half years older. Who also was in teaching and coaching.

They made it look so easy and it just seemed like it was such a great occupation, great career choice. I didn't know if that was what I was going to do, but I just kind of fell into that.

When you have an older brother, like I had, you follow him. And I did a lot of that. Played a lot of the same sports that he played and eventually got into teaching, in coaching right out of Ball State.

I played at Ball State University for my dad. And when I graduated there, I began teaching physical education at the elementary and middle school level and coaching.

But I really didn't think a lot about it. I was around so many great coaches and so many tremendous teachers that it just seemed like the thing for me to do.

They all had purpose in what they were doing. And I was just blessed that I was around so many of them that I think a lot of that rubbed off on me.

I was able to go out  and have some success early that led to more success down the road. But originally I wasn't a professional coach.

I was a teacher and then the coaching was just kind of on the side. I was coaching volleyball, basketball, track and field. I was coaching baseball. I was coaching softball. So I was doing a lot of different things while I was teaching in my early years.

But my goal, my dream, was always to coach Division 1 volleyball.

I felt like that was, the dream job. And after 22 years of teaching and coaching, I finally was able to get the opportunity.

I never thought it would go like it went though. I went straight from high school, coaching high school and club, to coaching in the Big Ten conference. And a lot of people second guessed that decision by Purdue to bring in this coach who had never coached at the collegiate level before, and then come to the Big Ten.

But I've always believed coaching is coaching. There are tons of coaches at the high school and club level in America that can coach at the Division 1 level.

I think that there's a misconception that, just because you haven't been in college, you're not a great coach.

Some of the best coaches in the world are not coaching at the college level or the pro level. They either don't wanna do that or they just haven't gotten there yet.

But I always knew once I started teaching and coaching that this was where I wanted to go.

I was just very fortunate that an athletic director in the Big Ten had the guts to make that decision and allowed me to come to Purdue.

What advice would you give yourself as a starting coach? An advice that is so clear and logic for you now, but that you had to develop over the years.

It's not about me.

When I was working with the Munciana volleyball club, which is one of the better clubs in our country.  You'd have all these guys that were coming out of Ball State, out of the university there.

It was all about how well 'they' could do and as you mature as a coach, you realize it's not about you.

It's about developing players and developing people. I've been coaching for about 44 years and it's absolutely all about the athletes.

And sometimes I have to remind people on my support staff of that, because they get upset about something... And I say, we're not here if it's not for those 17 players. We're not at Purdue. We don't have a job if it isn't for the student athletes.

I've always felt like I was coaching and teaching for the right reasons. But the competitive juices sometimes takes coaches and makes them feel it's all about how many matches 'they' win or how many championships that 'they' can win. And what do they look like to the crowd. If they're there coaching at those particular, important matches et cetera...

And so as you get older, you get over that.

And young people, the sooner you do get over that, the better coach you're gonna be and the better teacher of the game and the better mentor you'll be.

Don't worry about those type of things, just do your job.

And you can learn more from the players sometimes than anybody else. You need to listen more to your players.

Again, I didn't do a lot of that when I was young. I do a lot of it now.

This is a relationship business. You're coaching at the college level, these are grown women, they want to be respected and they want to have relationships.

And if they feel like, there's a trust factor between you and them, you're gonna get so much more out of them and their experience is gonna be so much better.

So I think understanding that what we're doing is to try to develop people, develop in our case young women to be able to go out, whether it's to go like Annie Drews and play on the USA Olympic team and win the first gold medal.

Super. If they're gonna go be the best nurse they can be in the Indianapolis hospital system.

Great. But our job is just to get them to where they can have a great career and they can love life, the way that we do.

How do you go about building that relationship with your freshmen? There is so much going on, putting high expectations on themselves, new inputs, new environment.

It's an absolute process that I think you start well before they get here. You're communicating with them and trying to help them get ready and developing that relationship.

Sometimes my assistant coach, who's my recruiting coordinator, who does a great job, Kathy Jewell, she doesn't like me to go out and spend so much time watching the players who are already committed to Purdue.

To me, that's the most important thing, to let them know that just because they committed, they're not on their own. I'm still gonna be there.

And I'm getting to know them, by watching them play and then obviously once they sign the national letter of intent, we can communicate with them.

And once they get to a certain age, I can talk to them when tournaments are over and I can get on the phone and call them as they're driving home.

Those things are huge.

You don't spend your 80 days of recruiting, that the NCAA gives you, always chasing players.

You've gotta make sure that you're building the relationships with those players that have committed to you and to your program.

And it's always a lot more fun, of course, watching players that you've already got; than going out sitting next to 15 other Division 1 coaches and trying to figure out how you're gonna get the next one. But there's a blend of what you have to do of course.

But I think it's important that those players become more and more comfortable before they get here. Otherwise it is gonna be a difficult situation for them once they arrive.

In preparing our conversation I watched an interview where you talked about recruiting and your efforts in finding that player which isn't yet that 'All American', but a player with the right amount of talent and grit who could potentially grow or be developed into that All American college status.

How many people can get those All Americans to their school or to their program? I mean, it's not gonna happen that often.

I'll just be honest with you. If I'm out recruiting and I walk on a court where there's the kid from California or Texas or Florida, some place that's not as familiar with West Lafayette, Indiana.

And I see, I won't name names, but I see 4 or 5 of the top programs in the country on that court...

I may not waste a lot of time because that kid's getting way too much attention. She's too popular with the top coaches, she's already proven what kind of an athlete, what kind of a player she is.

I've gotta go find the same athlete but that nobody knows about. And then just have the confidence that we can develop that player, when we get them.

And looking for other things too, like you mentioned... is she a baller? I mean does she just play her heart out all the time? Does she understand the game?

Some of these things that can take a really good player to become great. Where a really great athlete may not have some of those tendencies or skills and they never get there.

We take a lot of pride in who the person is kinda like what you talked about. Who are they? What makes them special?

And then we just have to get to the gym with our staff and do a better job than what most of the rest of the country's doing.

VB: And it's also not black and white. Of course. At 18-19 you still develop so much, but somebody that's gritty at 18, they will stay that way.

Yeah. And the other thing is, right now, we're having to make these decisions on these players so fast.

In America, they changed the recruiting process to where you can't talk to a player until June 15th before their junior season, their junior year in high school. And so you may start making these phone calls with these players on June 15th, you might have a list of 15 to 20 players, you're gonna talk to. You've watched them play, you've talked to their club coach, their high school coach.

But you've never talked to them before. But many of them are expecting to get an offer from you when you talk to them on the phone the first time.

How do you know what you're getting? And how do they know what they're getting?

In some ways I love the fact that we don't have to recruit 14 year olds, which is what we were doing before. That was really sketchy. Now you can watch them mature and develop, but you still have to make those decisions too soon. And they're making their decisions too soon. Some of them don't even go on two visits, they go on one visit and they make their decision.

So it's interesting, you know, trying to get this right is a really important part of developing a program.

Getting the right people on the bus is, is still the number one concept.

You've gotta get the right people in your program.

As a complete outsider it's interesting to see what is happening with recruiting, the transfer portal and NIL all in the mix right now. For you coaches, being a representative of an institution and trying to recruit players, it must be a hot mess.

Well, the NCAA has to get control of that situation very fast. In women's volleyball, it hasn't become a big deal. The NIL, name image and likeness, has not become huge like it has in football, in men's basketball.

But it's a matter of time before it starts really being a factor.

I've not had a single recruit ask me about NIL, not one.

I think that the Big Ten institutions are in an ideal spot for women's volleyball to be able to enhance their experience with NIL. Because it's the most popular game for women in our league.

The Big Ten is just a dominant conference. We're really in a good spot. And with the success that our program has had in the last 10 to 15 years, we're gonna be able to do okay on that.

I'll tell you a funny story.

I have a new lake house not too far from here. And I just invited a bunch of people over for a social function. I've smoked a couple briskets and my wife had some side dishes and everything, so we had probably 30 people over there. And they're all having a good time...

And what a collective is, it's this group of big money people, that are gonna start dropping money into the program, by dealing on their own. And obviously they all thought I was serious and I was not. But that's what's going on.

In men's basketball, they're starting these collectives, but yet the coach is not supposed to be aware of what the people and the collective are doing.

So how are they gonna know even which people they want to give the money to, if they haven't had, you know, some kind of communication with the coach?

So the whole thing screwed up.

I know the NCAA is now finally starting to try to talk about it and figure out that you just can't give somebody $50,000 without them doing somewhat $50,000 worth of work for it.

What is $50,000 worth of work, right now? Nobody knows.

I think what you'll see in sports like volleyball is, they're gonna do charity work, they're gonna do camps. They're gonna do something to get that money.

In sports like football and basketball, you may have to look really hard to find out what they're doing to receive those pay checks.

I read that the Purdue women's volleyball program only had a couple of transfers happening in the last 15 years, also that speaks to the program's intention of course.

I hope the world doesn't change completely with the transfer portal. It's looking like it is. It's becoming a free agency very, very quickly.

But I still think that places like Purdue...we'll generate loyalty. We'll generate the desire to stay.

That won't change overnight. That's a result of the culture of your program.

Everyone will talk to you about, 'our culture is family oriented', well, prove it! Prove it by how long you're gonna stay there and prove it by do your people staying and by you taking great care of them.

And there's times where, you know, there are some coaches that would've probably encourage people to leave, if they were in my shoes.

I'm not doing that. I don't think that sends the right message to the next player that wants to come to Purdue.

Do you have a particular goal? Maybe a goal that you already reached or a goal that is so hard to reach that it gives you daily motivation?

It's a simple question, but the answer is complex.

But I think the simple version would be, I want to create the best volleyball program for college women in America.

And people will say, well yeah, you haven't won a national championship and they'd be right.

You know, my dad was at Ball State University for 35 years, coaching men's volleyball. If you're familiar, and I know you've grown up at a time where Ball State wasn't quite as big of a name as it was, but Ball State has produced more volleyball coaches in America than any other college. That's a fact.

You've had Craig Skinner. You've had Kelly Sheffield on your show, Ball State guys. Mick Haley, Ball State guy. They're all over the place.

Now, does that mean he ran a great program? Not necessarily, but he did. And it's unique.

They never won a national championship. Certainly one of our goals is to win a national championship and we've been knocking on the door, getting closer and closer.

But I don't lose sleep at night over the fact that we haven't won a national championship. If I have a problem with an athlete, because we did something wrong as a coaching staff or support staff or university, I lose sleep.

I just want them to have the most positive experience that they could possibly have as a student athlete and everything else takes care of itself.

If you wake up every day and you're going to make sure that your people are doing well. And if they have a problem, you're gonna help them take care of that. You're gonna motivate them. You're gonna get to know what makes them tick. The things that they need to hear and how they need to hear it. That's what we're trying to do here at Purdue.

And at the end of the day, we may not win a national championship. We might. We have the talent coming. We've had great talent. We've been really close. But a lot of things have to fall your way for that to happen.

I want to be able to control what I can control as a coach and our staff wants to do that to. And if those athletes,  they can't wait to come into your gym after a full day of classes, then you've got something going the right way.

I think that we've certainly won at a high level and that helps keep people happy and keeps them motivated.

But we're still searching for things.

And I think that's another form of motivation. We haven't gotten, what we want yet!

But to answer your question. I think that the thing that I can control is a positive experience in the sport of volleyball for our student athletes. And that's my goal.

In your day to day with the team, how do you put emphasis on the things you find important.

I'd like to start most of our practices off in our video room.

A lot of people like to do it in front of their board. Hugh is one of those that does that. I like to have them in the video room where I can get their attention and talk about, where the emphasis is today. I like to put a quote up on the board or I like to show a quick video clip.

Something that they're looking at and I ask them to respond to it. I ask them all to write down in their notebook..what it means to them. Or how does this impact our team? Or maybe I just ask them a question about, where we are as a team.

So I like to show something up on the screen and then have them respond to that.

And that eventually leads us where we're trying to go that day with practice or where we're trying to go that week with our team.

When practice starts, I don't like to be involved in the first drill or two myself, cause I want to be able to go around and communicate with my players.

I want to go around and see how their day is going. How are they doing? Hey, yesterday was great. Okay. Let's not let up, today. Let's make sure we're developing further.

When we had the COVID break and we couldn't do much, I really got into podcasts and I listened to a lot of podcasts during that time. I've been married for 43 years and my wife one day said, 'I can't believe what a better coach you are now, because you've been listening to these podcasts'.

And you know, they weren't about volleyball training. It was about the art of learning, having a growth mindset.

I taught for 22 years in public education...but sometimes you get away from the essence and you just start thinking, how are we going to train volleyball players, right. But you forget what makes them learn and why and how do they learn?

So for about a year and a half, I'd take these long walks and I would just listen to a variety of different people talking about different things. One that really set home to me most was The Learner Lab. I'm sure you probably have listened to that before. It was outstanding.

I just went from there to different ones. 'Coach your brains out' was a good one. That's more volleyball oriented, but anyway, really good stuff.

And I really felt like that helped me, re-energize, refocus me as a teacher and a coach, as opposed to just kind of going through the motions again...

And my wife, being a long time teacher herself, recognized that. So she could appreciate the fact that whether they are elementary age, which is what she was teaching, or they're 21 years old, which is what I'm coaching, you know, every day is an education.

I'm learning, they're learning and there's always ways to do it better.

And you just have to keep studying those kind of things.

When preparing 'the next game', how does your general approach look like?

I think that in our league you have to be really, really good at preparing for opponents.

But not at the risk of not spending enough time on your own team.

And I think that's what can happen, you know, you spend so much time getting ready for Wisconsin, Minnesota, Penn State, Nebraska, Ohio State, Michigan, Michigan State, Illinois all down that line... that sometimes you make your team wonder whether or not they can beat this opponent. If you're not careful.

You have to bring it as a method. This is how we're going to win! This is how we're going to stop them!

And I think coaches in the Big Ten might tell you that there's a lot of different ways to defend and I'll speak mostly from a defensive standpoint because I'm kind of our defensive coordinator. My younger brother, John, runs the offense.

Defensively, you know, you can be a read blocking team, which we are some, you can be commit block, you can do all kinds of different things...

Because I coached basketball during my career, I recognize the fact that there are certain players on the opponent's team that you've gotta stop. And it doesn't matter that you're in the Big Ten, when you have some of the best athletes in the country, the tendency is, the setter is gonna set those people over and over and over again.

Why are we going to act like we don't know that's coming. So we do spend a lot of time gearing our defense to shut down the opponent's strengths. Almost makes sense, right.:-)

But you can't spend too much time preparing and going over tape, sitting in that video room and breaking it down in practice. You have to help them understand that they're good enough to beat the opponent.

They're good enough to win the match. These are some of the things we have to do, but as the match goes on, we've gotta adjust to the match.

Because the biggest mistake you can make in preparation is putting together this masterpiece of a game plan. And then the other team either does something totally different or they respond right away and they start doing something different and you're still out there trying to follow the same game plan you put together all week.

The more experienced team you have, the less you have to deal with that. You know, the last couple years, we've had tons of veteran players on the floor. So it's so much easier to get them prepared to play, in a big match. So much easier to adjust during the flight.

I tell them, we're gonna be a player's led team. We're not gonna be a coach's led team. We have to be a player's led team. And they don't come to college knowing it, because when they're in high school, there are not a lot of player led teams around.

But when you get to college, they have to take over the team.

And because we've had a lot of experience on our team lately, all of that has been easy. This year will be a little bit different.

We lost seven players. Either, COVID seniors or (5) seniors. So now we've got to help our players understand, what it all means. How do they fill that role of being a leader.

It's not just about what they are going to do on a Friday night to be together, but on the floor, when the stuff happens, what are you gonna do?

How are you gonna handle that situation? When we call a timeout and I'm over talking to my assistant coaches, what are you gonna do in that huddle to make sure that our team understands what's next and how are we gonna be successful?

So as far as preparation, I think that we do a nice job of that. And we're aggressive in our preparation.

We're not afraid to do anything that might be unique to help us win, to try to force the opponent, to do things that they're not comfortable with.

Cause I think that's helpful.

But you better be ready to make some adjustments on the fly because there's too many good coaches in our league to sit there and keep doing the same thing over and over again.

How do you see the men's and women's game evolve in the coming years?

Well today, we're sitting at one of the best times ever for our sport, internationally or in our country.

We've had a hard time in America getting men's volleyball off the ground. And a lot of that was because of what we have that is called title IX, gender equality over here.

When volleyball was starting to make its push back in the seventies, they passed title IX, which meant that you had to have equal opportunities for women.

Which is great, I wouldn't be sitting here today if we didn't have that rule passed...but it cut some men's sports.

It made it more difficult for some men's sports, like volleyball, wrestling, track and field and swimming.

But now because people have just found a way for volleyball to expand, there's so many guys playing volleyball in this country. More than ever before.

My son coaches at Indiana Tech, which is a smaller college program in Fort Wayne, Indiana. And they've been to the national championships, the last couple of seasons.

They just started the program three years ago, but there are so many guys wanting to play college volleyball now.

The sport is blowing up in this country and I assume that's going on in other places. I think we may have been a little late to the party, but we're here now.

And they're gonna party on in America with boys volleyball.

I think that's one thing that you're gonna see, our game in the men's side is going to get better and better and better.

We always had some elite athletes, but now there's gonna be a lot more elite athletes. There's gonna be more college programs playing volleyball.

My father passed away just about five months ago and his goal in life was to promote the game of volleyball, raise awareness, get more people playing. And he was able to kind of see this whole thing starting to roll. So that was pretty neat.

I think that the college coaches on the women's side are working really hard right now to try to get more television exposure. We've gotten so much more exposure in the last 10 years. You can find volleyball on TV all the time now.

But the problem is that the timing of our game makes it difficult at key points, key times in the season to get a lot of exposure, because you've got college basketball picking up or you've got college football which demands air time.

And so we're working hard to try to figure out how we can get that exposure.

I still believe that the biggest problem with our sport is that too many people don't understand it. Our rules changed a lot. Men who are sitting around watching TV right now, didn't grow up playing volleyball.

So we've got to do a better job of educating them on what the sport is like.

And I'm not talking about the announcers going through their routine before the game. The games played to 25 and...that's bull crap. Educate me! Let's get it on TV more!

Every college coach has to do a better job of educating their fans. So their fans understand the game.

We have what we call 'the situation room'. Before every home match, I invite all of our fans to come in and meet. And I go over the scouting report. I talk about the last game we played. I talk about some of our individual players, what makes them so special, things like that.

We have to do a better job of educating our country so that these TV producers, these TV people who make decisions will do a better job of getting our sport on TV. And then more people will become aware of it.

But I mean, am I complaining? Not at all, because we have blown up. But sometimes when it's really starting to roll, that's when you gotta really put the hammer down and you gotta really work for making some changes.

But I think along with that the question should be...how do we make the game more enjoyable to watch?

And I think, number one, by not blowing the whistle as often. Which is something you've seen developed during your time as a player. Not making all the ball handling calls. I think we're real close to eliminating that double hit on the second contact.

Because fans look at it like 'why was this called, but that wasn't called', you know, and they don't understand it. So let's make it more simple.

When a quarterback throws a football and it wobbles, the referee doesn't throw a flag. It's just a bad throw. So if the setter butchers a ball, why do we have to call that? I mean, it's not going where it's supposed to go. So you're already getting an advantage on the other side of the net.

I think eliminating those decisions is the next step.

An officials job is so much easier now than it has ever been, which is good. Before you didn't know what you were gonna get from game to game, it was based on who walked in the gym with the official shirt on. Now it's not as complicated, now the game is easier to call. Sometimes the lines judges, I think have the toughest calls of anybody in our sport, if you don't have a good video system.

And so I think that you're gonna see more and more of the sport on TV. I think we have to continue to make changes to simplify the game.

Because I think that's what fans wanna see.

Continuing on that, according to you, are there other rule changes that would benefit our game?

There's a debate in our country about how many subs we should have. And some of the premise is that, well, we need to prepare these players to play internationally and internationally they only have the six subs.

And in men's volleyball back when I was playing, you only had six subs. You got all these players on the bench. And you're not gonna play any of them.

And I get the point that the game IS different, if you only have or use six subs. You better get more all around players and they've gotta be able to do it all.

But if you're trying to grow the sport, in my opinion, having less subs does not help you with that. I just think that it hurts you.

Our college game right now is doing very well. I mean, the attendance across the country is rising. There are more people playing our game right now than ever before. And I just don't agree that we should be changing the substitution rules so we can prepare people to play on the Olympic team.

How many people are gonna play at that level?

You've got hundreds of thousands of people playing, let's allow us to get as many as we can in the game, to keep the integrity of the game and not slow the growth down. And I think we're at a decent point for that right now.

I think most college coaches in our country have adjusted and are using the ball control players in a really good way, but it's also an advantage to have the back row attackers. So you have to make a decision now.

What style do you wanna play?

Do you wanna play the style where you're gonna out 'ball control' people and you're gonna out defend them and your serve receive is gonna be on point? Or do you wanna have, you know, Caitlyn Newton hitting out of the back row. Or do you wanna have, in our case, Grace Cleveland hitting out of the back row.

And we had kind of a hybrid approach to that.

We had Jena Otec who was a defensive player of the year in the Big Ten. We had Marissa Hornung who was a great ball control player. Maddie Schermerhorn who's coming back this year. But we also had enough of the backrow attack that the blockers on the other side of the net could not be releasing to go out to people when we're out of system because they didn't know where the ball might go.

I understand what the point is that, you know, Terry Petitt likes to use and John Cook likes to use, it must be a Nebraska thing.:-)

But I think we're in a really good spot for our game right now. And it certainly allows more kids to play if you don't limit the amount of substitutions and more kids that aren't six foot three and six foot one to enter our game.

So you're allowing more of those defensive kids, smaller players to come in and play the game. And I think that's right.

What's the best game you've ever seen. Or what is the most memorable game of your own, or one that you enjoyed being remembered off.

I think the game that kind of changed our trajectory happened in 2010, we had a team that was barely in the top 20, but it was a good team.

When the NCAA tournament started to get together and seed the teams, we knew Florida was gonna be number one. They had only lost one match and they had a really good team. And there's no question they were gonna get the number one seed. I thought they were a little bit overvalued. And I knew we were gonna be around 14 through 17 seed.

And I told our team before the draw, I said, I'd love to be the 16th seed. Because for the 16th seed we're gonna host the subregional. If we can win both those matches, we go to the regional and we're gonna play Florida. And we had never gone to the elite eight yet. This was back in 2010. I'd only been here for about seven years. We had been to the Sweet 16 several times, but it not got past that point.

Well, the draw comes out and there it is, Florida is number one and we're number 16. So we have to take care of business.

We have to beat, I think, Louisville and Kentucky at home and we do. I think, we beat Louisville in a five set match.

So we go down to Austin, Texas, the university of Texas in Gregory gym and we play Florida. Florida's ranked number one in the country and they've got lots of talent, they're big and physical.

During the game we're down 23 to 19 in the first set and we storm back and win that. And then we win the next two.

We actually win the match in 72 minutes, which is a pretty short match for college volleyball. We knock off the number one ranked team in the country. We advance to the elite eight for the first time in school history in Gregory gym, which is a great place to play by the way.

The next night, we are going play Texas, who almost lost to Illinois the night before, but we're gonna play Texas and we're playing great volleyball. We were playing great toward the end of the year.

We're up 23 to about 15 in the first set and my setter, who is an all American Jaclyn Hart, does the splits digging a ball and tears her hamstring off her bone.

So a six foot two inch setter is done for the rest of the match. We bring a freshman in that hasn't played much all year.

She plays her heart out, but we end up losing three really close games to Texas and they go to the final four. So when I talk about what it takes sometimes to win and lose, sometimes you don't have a lot of control over it. But the win against Florida was a great win for us.

It got us into that regional final for the first time.

And it's one that I won't forget.

If you could have a gigantic billboard anywhere with anything on it — metaphorically speaking, getting a message out to every athlete on the globe — what would it say and why?

High expectations demands tremendous responsibility.

Everybody wants to do great. Everybody wants to be on TV. Everybody wants to win championships. But what does it take to get there? That's something that's on our board.

If you want to get there, you gotta pay the price. And that's why people come to play in the Big Ten.

It's the best conference in the country. There are some that are knocking on the door. The ACC with Pitt and Louisville, certainly. For a long time the ACC just couldn't get any traction. Now they've got traction. Obviously the PAC 12 is good. The SEC with Kentucky winning the championship two years ago.

But year in and year out, the Big Ten draws the best athletes in the country for the sport of volleyball. And night in and night out, it's a war.

So you come here because you want to be in the spotlight. You want to be on the big stage. But to get to the big stage you gotta put in the work.

And there's a lot of responsibility. Right now our kids are not on campus. It's the month of May. School's out. They go home for about a month.

What are they doing? In this month, what are they doing? Because of all, that's going on in college athletics and in our world with COVID and everything, for mental health reasons, you wanna just take a break.

But on the other hand, I hope the Wisconsin players are taking a break and I hope that the Minnesota players have taken a break. Because I don't want them in the gym getting better. But we know that they are and we know that everybody is doing what they can in this league to get ahead.

They know when the end of August comes around and we start non-conference play that at the end of September, we're in the Big Ten.

And the competition will just be as fierce as ever this year.

The Big Ten will may not have quite as much experience as we had in the league a year ago. Because a lot of those super seniors were really good. Well, Wisconsin obviously was a great example of that...

But, you know, you have a responsibility if you're gonna play in this league. If you're gonna come to Purdue and play volleyball, you have a responsibility to do the work and make the commitment.

And so I think that's kind of what it's all about.

What is an aspect about the coaching life that needs more attention?

I think it's really important for people that are professional coaches, as you like to put it, is that you have to have balance in your life.

I think that's huge.

If you're married and you have a family and you have 10 grandkids, you've got balance in your life. And to me, it starts with my wife who is really, really good at making sure that I don't take anything I'm doing too seriously.

I mean, she understands the value of winning, but she also recognizes that I can get locked in to doing too much with volleyball. But I think, if I am successful, the key to my success is that I have balance in my life. And I understand the importance of family.

But I think that it's important for the young folks coming up out there, that number one, don't take yourself too seriously and outwork everybody that's in your way.

But also have balance in your life and always have other sources that you can put some of your emotion into other than volleyball. Because if that doesn't go well, then you got a real problem.

You're putting yourself in a bad situation.

So I think that's great advice. And I got that from my father, you know. I see people where you wonder about how they're gonna survive because they are throwing themselves too heavily into just the coaching aspect of their life.

Again on one side I'm saying you gotta outwork everybody and then I say...have balance. And people are thinking, well how do you do that? And I say, I think at Purdue, we've done that.

I have this staff that's been together for 19 years, the longest tenured staff in college volleyball. I don't expect them to come into this office if there's nothing to do. I'm not gonna tell them they gotta be in the gym if there's no reason to be in there.

You wanna outwork people, but you want to efficiently outwork people.

It's not about necessarily being in the gym for four hours a day. Of course, the NCAA rules now kind of limit how long you can be in the gym, but it's getting stuff done appropriately and efficiently. And not just being over there, just to be over there.

I watch a ton of tape. We'll practice. I'll go home. I'll watch that practice twice. Now at this point in time, my kids are gone. I don't have grandkids around most of the time. My wife, she's in her room watching her shows on TV and I'm out watching tape for about three hours a night, but that's what I love to do.

And I love to be able to communicate with players while I'm watching it. I'll send them a clip, 'look what you did tonight in practice'. Or can you see what you're doing with your blocking here? We gotta make an adjustment here. You need to get on Volleymetrics and you need to start watching this every night.

So I kind of got out of the way of your question there.

But at the end of the day, a coach that doesn't have balance is not gonna be in the business very long.

Also concerning our athlete's short and long term health the distinction between working hard and working hard in an efficient matter is still an important topic. Unfortunately overtraining is still real on many levels.

We like to put a lot of our hours into non jumping. The ball control aspect of it, whether it's just repetitions on serve - receive... our passers come in 45 minutes before anybody else.

And we also work a lot on fundamental stuff. Before we get into, the actual  team serve - receive, those kind of things.

So a lot of the hours we spend are non-dynamic jumping hours. We are just staying on the floor, defense, passing, serving, and then we'll get into the other aspects of the game.

How has a failure, or apparent failure, set you up for later success? Do you have a “favorite failure” of yours?

Yeah, there was a team that we had a lot of talent with.

It was a freshman class. You know, Danielle Cuttino who is playing in Brazil and now she's gonna be over in Japan next year. Great athlete. Her freshman year was the same year that Val Nichol was a senior and Val played in Germany and a couple other places and was with the USA league here lately.

But we had a lot of talent.

And this freshman class came in, it was maybe the best freshman class we ever had. Azaria Stahl was in that freshman class as well. A really good group.

And I kind of gave them a little bit too much ownership, too soon. I knew they were special and we've been kind of this program that had been good, but not great.

And I thought I saw something in this group that I wanted them to kind of exert more of themselves into this team. So I gave them ownership early. And what actually happened that year was that we ended up having friction. Believe it or not in women's volleyball. :-)

We had some friction between some of the younger, aggressive mentalities and some of the people who were trying to lead the team.

So you got Cuttino, Stahl, Nichol, Annie Drews, Sam Epenesa. A lot of these people have gone on and had really good professional volleyball careers and...we don't make the NCAA tournament. We should have made the NCAA tournament, in my opinion.

We finished, I think, fifth in the Big Ten and had some nice wins. But a lot of the teams that we played during that season were supposed to be good and they weren't. So our RPI got hurt also.

But at the end of the day, I think I mismanaged that team. And I mismanaged it by misevaluating what my observations were and let some of these young guns have too much too soon.

I don't know if that has changed everything in how I work now. But it certainly is something that has helped me to not make the same mistake again.

I think because of that, I spend more time helping our juniors and seniors to lead and manage and have more meetings with them as opposed to telling everybody how much I like the freshman class. And giving them probably more ownership than they needed at that time.

That's the best example I can come up with.

Do you have a book or a specific author that you like a lot?

I like Malcolm Gladwell, I don't know if you've read much of his stuff. He's got some great stuff.

'Good to great' is a book that when you're in the Big Ten, it just kind of is who we are. You know, what kind of changes you have to make to get from where you are to get to that next level. And I found that book to be a good read.

I like reading about great coaches, whether it's Rick Pitino in basketball or Vince Lombardi in football also has some great books.

I'm more listening to stuff now and not reading so much. But those are a few I like.

In the last five years, what new behaviour has most improved your life or coaching life?

I mentioned this earlier, but learning from your players, taking your cues from your athletes and not walking in every day with your own ideas and going to impose your own will on your team.

But knowing who your team is.

And we're in a world now where there's been a lot going on and mental health is a real concern.

And so you can't be the same guy you were when you were 25 years old. That would not work in our program over here.

But in the last five years, I've done more listening to our players. I've been more understanding of our players. And I've tried to become a better teacher still.

Every day is an education and I'm just trying to get better all the time.

I'm not planning on finishing this job anytime soon. And so there's a lot still to be learned...

But I think to answer your question. Positivity is huge. And I know that when I was growing up, coaches could care less if they were positive, they didn't understand what 'positive' was. It was the Bob Knight era back then.

But I think right now, especially in women's athletics, but it's the same in all athletics ...

Having a calm, positive voice is a lot more important than anything else.

So I think those are some things that I probably have developed here in the last five years. I think it's been a continual process, but things that I am more focused on personally than I have been in the past.

Thanks Dave!



