===== SESSION: https://volleybrains.com/laurent-tillie/ =====

----- VIDEOS -----
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Mc2Q93b48Ww
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SSz4JRX68KQ
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rEcX4EPFak0
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9EgNYdz7W7I
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xFYkGu353l0
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=agLwFV5UZ-U
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Kn2EoFYGU2E
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KD6nnicA3lY
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6lJpdDTGHWg
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nihOQT5bUZ8
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=a18nehQxsPI
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=g1Iijk83qcY
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Y_d3epx99kQ
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=70CcGrGXObc
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nn2ukzngSfc
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HEzDRSQKhl8
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3HM6chOQqqc
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_F1eGdRhYGg
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=aIybPs_yRWY
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hWiNx7xWkNg
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=r6UrmFP5_IM
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=q_cp8nebs_A
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=J4W4x7-G548
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VgKcUG61fM4

----- TEXTO -----
39. Laurent Tillie:'The right attitude is everything'

In this Masterclass we feature Laurent Tillie. Laurent has been the successful head coach of the French national team for a period of nearly 10 years(2012-2021), while accumulating many world class victories.

For sure winning the Olympic gold medal in 2020 in Tokyo was the pinnacle of his work with the French national team.

After winning the Olympic Gold, Laurent retired from the national team. He is now coaching the Japanese club team, the Panasonic Panthers.

Of course this Masterclass is filled with great insights, what the most important factor for success is for Laurent and his coaching, how he coached a 'new generation' to success, where he based his coaching on while starting out, how his concepts evolved and so, so much more.

There are 19 exclusive video clips in this Masterclass.

Enjoy!

Laurent, why did you decide to commit to being a professional volleyball coach? What pushed you towards that decision?

When I started playing volleyball, there wasn't a professional league in France, we were amateurs.

I had a bachelor degree to teach physical education, but I didn't like the actual job. I started to study physiotherapy after that and became a licensed physiotherapist. When I finished my career as a volleyball player, I had a physiotherapy office in my city, on the beach in Cagnes-sur-Mer (South of France) on a very nice location working together with a very good friend of mine.

I played for 20 years - 21 years in pro leagues. I played in Italy and in many places in France. And when I stopped, I stopped because some questionable things had happened with my former club and it felt like time to stop.

While I was on holiday the president of Cannes asked me if I wanted to become a head coach. And I had all my degrees to be a pro coach because I hated wasting my time during my career. So I said, 'Hey, maybe I can try it for one year.'

It would be a nice challenge.

And then and there I decided to start to become a coach. And during that first period of 3 years I was both a coach and a physiotherapist. So it was a really busy time, but very interesting.

And after those 3 years I decided to become a full time coach. But before all that happened, I already had some ideas or things going on in my head about coaching our game.

When I still was a player in Paris, we had played a tournament in Lausanne. Over there I had visited the Olympic museum, the IOC museum. After that visit, I went to the library, looked for volleyball books, I found maybe 2 or 3. I took one of them, it was Carl McGown's 'Science of coaching volleyball'..

I read the first page, then the others...

Damn, I now know why we've always lost against the USA, it was so, so eye-opening.

Their methodology of practicing, the way of thinking about the game and the skills... everything was so different than what we had done for so many years.

So I think that after reading that book I had found a reason to become a coach, to do it better. I think that's why I started or that I had the will to become a volleyball coach one day.

What did those American coaches do differently?

Well, it was Carl McGown and of course Marv Dunphy and Doug Beal.

They changed the game. They changed...volleyball.

As a player many times I had the chance to play against them in 1982, 83, 84, until 88-90.

They changed the concept of the methodology of practice. In France we were practicing a lot...a lot. But we were doing always the same things, skills, skills, skills, physical, skills, physical, skills.

We almost never played the actual game. Only during the friendly games we would play and of course in the official games where we had to. :-)

So when you read Carl McGown's books, he'll say that the best drill for receiving is serving, receiving, pass, set, attack. The best drill for setting is serve, pass, set, attack... I'm exaggerating a little bit here but that's the concept. But it's a really concept. If you commit to this concept you'll find your own way inside of it.

My 'first sport' was swimming. Swimming is a sport where skill is very, very important.

But you don't learn to swim while laying on a table. You learn to swim in the water, in the actual environment. So first you learn to not drown and then to breathe in the water and then to finally actually swim.

Also as physiotherapists, we use some techniques in rehab. When somebody had a stroke, for example. You can't yell to them and say, 'Hey, raise your arm, raise your arm. You are stupid or what? Raise your harm.'

It's not about being stupid. The patient simply can't do it. But I still see many coaches do that, thinking that after they gave a basic instruction their player can simply go out and execute on it.

To help your the patient you put some pressure on his arm, you let him push and so on and in the end, the patient is able to raise his arm. That's the actual concept which will make you ready for playing.

My concept of coaching is putting you in the right situation so that you, the player, will find the right answer.

I don't want that the player thinks too much. So create the right situation with good stimuli to get to the right answer. And skill is important, but skill is not the goal of the practice.

The first thing to do is to play and win.

And if you play and you have some trouble, then we will have to work on the actual skills, but you have to know why you train those skills.

When I was a player we did the exact opposite of that. We were practicing skills. 'Nice pass, nice set', but when we were playing ...mistakes and errors piled up. We weren't prepared to play.

So that's why I had the insight and why I was ready to change my way of coaching and practicing.

In preparing our call I watched a video wherein you describe that the current game of volleyball is a game that's all about implementing a few well trained reactions on the right moment. Because the game doesn't allow you to think.

Yeah. I think this is really important and it's even more common now.

But when I started to coach in 2001, the players or people around me told me. 'What are you doing? You are too American.'

No, I'm not too American. I just have the same opinion as them. I tried to explain why I was convinced of this...

And in fact, there is a French poet and he said the following, which is one of my preferred sentences or quotations...

"Agir en primitif et prévoir en stratège."

You try to be prepared for all kinds of situations, but when the action starts, act like an animal, without thinking.

And I really like that, because I think our players need to be ready to do exactly that. When you are preparing the players or the team, you try to find and define every different or possible situation.

But when the game starts, don't think play, play, play. Because you will only be able to adjust one or two different things at max.

And that's why that is my creed.

In the same video you mention the importance that you give to 'having the right attitude' on the court. You mentioned having the attitude of a boxer in a ring. You don't care if a player makes a mistake if his attitude and body language is on point.

It's exactly that, it's exactly that. Because attitude is everything. I really think that with your body language, I mean your attitude, you can even change your state of mind.

You are able to control your fear. You can control your stress. It's normal that you have stress. It's normal that you are scared. When I was still a player, I was always scared, but it's part of the game and you have to accept it.

So to prepare all of this, you need to have the right attitude, body language, movement, concentration, eyes and posture like. And like you said, I often use the image of the boxer for that.

When you go in the ring, or you go to the beach, it's a different attitude. And saying it in that way, you immediately understand what I mean.

But sometimes there are players that don't understand it because they are not able to actually watch themselves or evaluate themselves. And as a coach, you see that. You see that there will be a problem because they do not have the right attitude.

If the player has the right attitude, I have nothing to say because you are 'in the game' and mistakes are part of the game and a coach has to accept that.

Of course you have to be ready to diminish the number of mistakes.

But everything in volleyball is so quick. Especially now where we have serves that go 135 - 140 kilometers an hour.(85 mph)

You can serve all along the service line. Your serve can touch the net. The setters are setting so quick, no high ball setting...

I'm taking care of attitude and the starting positions of the players and their attitude on their position. And then... play, because there is no time to think, just try to read and play.

What advice would you give yourself as a starting coach? An advice that is so clear and logic for you now, but that you had to develop over the years.

I'm a little bit of a lone wolf, a bit of a'solitaire'. When I started out I was doing the weights program, videos, statistics, I did everything by myself at least for the first 4-5 years.

And I found it difficult to work with a team of coaches. So when I started out I had to do more effort in communicating and sharing information. But you know in the end, because it's my responsibility. I want to keep all of it to myself.:-)

But yes, the lesson for me was; be more focused on communication.

We see in the US college game and national team that assistant coaches are able to give a lot of input to the players during time outs, in Europe that happens less. How do you approach that?

I was surprised with Karch when they took a timeout and it was Luka (Slabe) talking more than Karch. I see the same with Speraw. They speak between coaches and then they have 10 seconds left to explain what to do and so on.

And I wondered, why are they doing it like this? What can we do to change, why am I not doing it like this?

And so I tried to be more open and have assistant coaches give info directly to the players. But I don't like it. Because in the end, their message is not your message.

The team is not 6 single players. The team is one team, it's one entity and you have to speak to the team. Sometimes you need to speak to a single player, but it has to come through me.

So my assistant has to tell me what they want to say. And I'll tell them, okay, you can say it or maybe I feel like I should tell it.

It's really important at which exact moment you want to say something to your players. My coaching concept is to bring my team in the flow. They have to play without thinking.

And when you are in the flow, please don't ask for a timeout, don't speak to the players, let the team play by itself. That's really important.

If you need to stop playing, because the other team asks for a time out, our players come to the bench and when the staff now wants to give input...well you cut this flow and you lose the team.

So I want to control everything. Of course I give responsibility to my assistant coaches and they need to have input also towards the players, but that happens during practice time and while preparing game plans and briefings.

You have been a full time coach for a bit more than 20 years now, it's getting a bit of a cliché question, but of course every generation is different and your French national team group was for sure a 'new style' group to coach. Did you change your approach a lot over the last 2 decades?

I have to say, when I started to coach in Cannes in 2001...it was a really straight and strict style of coaching.

I was deciding everything and I was controlling more or less everything. But I also always tried to have some fun.

We have to be serious, but it's life also, so you can laugh... So for example, we introduced some practices where everybody could wear what they wanted, just to have some fun for one day.

After almost 10 years with the national team, like you said, the way of coaching has totally changed. It became something totally different, these players are part of a new generation, they are more autonomous, independent and there is a lot of joking and rap music.

Regarding respect, they're still respectful but in a different way. The language is totally different and the attitude is totally different, but in the end, the respect is the same.

You give some guidelines and you know that sometimes you have to move some of those lines because they need more freedom, it's really a more interactive coaching style.

They give their opinion more often and it's often accurate.

I always think that the most important things are what the players think and what the players feel, what the players can do on the court than what the coach wants.

That's why as a coach, you have to be pragmatic.

You have to adapt to each situation. Of course in regards to the opponent team, but most importantly to the different situations in your own team.

So my coaching evolved to be more energetic, I mean, you have to take care to keep good energy. A good spirit in the team.

You have to take care of the words that you use, when you use them when to push your players. It's not mathematical, this situation is like this, so we have to do this, I can tell you that for a coach that doesn't exist.

It's about controlling and bringing the team and the players where you want. So you have to be more like a psychologist, you have to be more a doctor in 'mind sciences'.:-)

Another image I like, I think that I'm a coach and as a coach, I am a sculptor of water.

When you have a team, they believe in you, they have trust in you and you can do a great job with that team. You will be able to make a very nice sculpture. You can become an Olympic champion, European champion, World champion.

But if you look too much around you and you get influenced by outside opinions, there is a bad vibe, you look for excuses and I don't know what else? Everything falls down. What you have sculpted disappears through your hands.

Coaching is more rewarding now because you have to really understand the players, it's totally not about just giving orders to them for them to execute.

We can say that it's more difficult to be a coach now than it was 15-20 years ago but it also equally became more rewarding to be successful right now. You need to be a master of many skills, just being able to be a great volleyball technician and tactician won't bring you that far.

Exactly and that's the interesting part of the job.

So you have to read books about motivation, about communication. You have to try to meet other coaches. What do they do? What do they do in this situation or what don't they do. You talk with foreign coaches, are in contact with different cultures.

Yeah, you have to work a little bit more than to just say, 'Hey, we do this, this, this and that is enough.' That's not the way to success.

The psychological part is really important. To be able to win the Olympics, that was a very, very important aspect. That's how we brought the team to their best possible level.

It really was 50-50, 50% controlling ego, controlling motivation, controlling respect, controlling team spirit, the other 50% are the tactics, the skills and the physical part.

And now you coach in Japan, which is known for not being emotional and being very focused on skills. :-)

That was part of the challenge and why I really accepted this job.

They are really skilled. They want to practice all the time on their skills.

That's why when I was here in my the first year(2020-2021) that they were asking me, 'But coach, why do we do 6 against 6 every day? I had to explain my philosophy and so on. And they are really respectful, I also need to respect that.

So I really try to make them a bit more aware of the European way of doing things, you know. Play, laugh, enjoy...

Of course you need to respect people, but when you play and you make a point or you block a senior player here, the younger player says 'sumimasen', excuse me, sorry that I blocked you.

No, you blocked him, be happy! So what I do is, I try to put a bit of 'bad spirit' in the games during the practice.

I try to be a little bit more crazy with them, I use a lot of games to try to have more fun.

Because the Japanese players are experiencing volleyball like it's their job. And we, in Europe, we start to play because it's fun, because we enjoy the game and that's what I try to bring a bit more here in Japan.

The future of volleyball, from a technical point of view, how will the game evolve according to your opinion? Or what are you hoping that the game will look like in a couple of years?

I don't like the risk some teams take while serving. There are some matches in Italy where they commit 25-28 serve errors, plus 8-9 aces, plus 5 balls coming back over the net.

Risk is part of the game, but there is something like too much risk also.

I would like to see a volleyball like here in Japan or like we see in women's volleyball, where the risk is more realistic, so you get more actions. That's my desire.

And then I think that... I don't know what it should be, but a set that goes to 25 points is very long. The first 10 points you don't care and you only start to be really focused after the 10th, maybe the 12th point.

So I was thinking maybe, 'Hey, if we would play to 4 winning sets but just play to 15-17 points.'

So you will say, yeah, but in this case every time you'll start in the same rotation to have your tallest players in front, but you can just control this problem by saying, okay, but the next set, you start with the same rotation in which you finished the first set.

So you will not have this problem. And I also would like to see 5-6 actions and then a break, 5-6 actions and then a break, as kind of a concept of the gameplay.

Technically, I think that when I started to play that we were 'universal players', we were skilled to be able to play more or less on every position. You only had the setter and the opposite as more specialized positions. And all of the other positions had to pass and had to block in the middle and so on.

We moved away from that concept and players became more specialised.

But now with the serves that are so powerful you start to have more universally skilled players again. You have opposites receiving now or a middle blocker who has to receive on short float serves.

So I think we are returning to become more technical once more, players need to be more skilled again.

I think that will be the next step because we need middle blockers in defense, we need opposites who can pass, sometimes the outsides will need to block in the middle, because we need a taller guy in front of the opposite.

So I think we will have more 'universalists' again.

Would you want to see some of the current rules changed?

I think that all the changes that were made in the last 10, 15 years were really good.

The moment that we are in, I don't feel that we need to change something. Just the things that I just explained, shorter sets, maybe trying to find something to do to decrease service errors, but that's all.

I really love the current game, the way we play defense, blocking and so on.

At one point we were discussing about, you know, you were able to touch the net. It was not a fault. But it was confusing. I prefer it like it's now, when you touch the net it's a fault and that's all.

So I think that I'm okay with the rules. Let's just find a situation to have shorter sets.

Best game you've ever seen. What recent or game from the volleyball vaults did validate once more that volleyball is the greatest sport on the globe.

I really loved to watch the final of the World championships in 1990, Italy against Cuba. It was impressive.

Another game that impressed me was when we lost 3-0 against Brazil in a quarter final in Maracanãzinho, which was filled to the brim with 18,000 spectators. Wow!

We lost our entire ability to play because we were shocked by that atmosphere.

But I really loved the final of the World championships in 1990, Italy - Cuba.

There was this tension about it, the mental aspect of the game was huge in that one. Teams fighting for each point. This was before we played with the rally point system, so you had to 'really' win your points. It was really, really emotional.

It's a game that, because it's mentioned so many times with this question that I also went to rewatch the game, the incredible, super talent of Despaigne playing against the Italian 'generazione di fenomeni'. Maybe a game that you cannot have anymore, right now. There is no player this important in a team anymore?

Ah, I remember Despaigne and Beltran, I think they were the outside hitters for Cuba and on the Italian side you had Zorzi, Lucchetta and Bernardi. I think that we can still have a game like that, but that final, it was a real fight.

But also for us, the Olympic final in Rio was a very nice game. And that one was more or less Ngapeth against the Russian team, against Kliuka and Mikhaylov.

But without any spectators, without that Olympic atmosphere, it was a bit sad also.:-) It was different.

If you can make the strongest 'starting six' in the world, right now. What would your team look like?

I will make a team with the 'game changers' of our game.

Karch, of course. Ngapeth because he's the new talent, not the 'new' talent but he's part of the new generation of players. He's a guy who spikes behind his back, fakes the pipe(bic) attack and sets, he invented a lot of things.

So I'll have Karch, Ngapeth, Savin(middle), Kim Ho-Chul(setter).

Maybe Buck or Gardini. I go for Buck as a middle blocker.

Opposite? I was really impressed by Miljkovic. Miljkovic on the opposite. As a libero I will put Grebennikov.

If you could have a gigantic billboard anywhere with anything on it — metaphorically speaking, getting a message out to every athlete on the globe — what would it say and why?

I will put 3 things on there:

No limits

Always give your 100%

No excuses

Here's a simple example why. When you coach young players, they believe in you, they trust you and they have hope to improve and to succeed as athletes. When you coach older players. They go, 'Oh no, it's too tough. No, we did beat them before, let's take it easy. Or, oh we always lose against this team' they put themselves in the situation before it has happened.

And that's exactly what I said to my players, my French national team.

The big success of this team, the big strength is that they always have faith in what they do and they always believe that they will win.

And that's a really big driver for success.

Before I knew the French national team I was talking about the concept of 'no limits', but they were a good example of what 'no limits' actually means.

We talk with a lot of athletes and coaches and I feel that the concept that 'everything is possible' is something that most people didn't have before, but that is more present now. But you're nothing with believing that if there is no action of course.

A coach has to explain what you have to do and try to bring, to give you motivation. It's not just, I have to 'believe' that I can do everything.

No, take it step by step. And you are able to do it.

But someone has to show you the way. And you, as an individual, needs to try to do your best in what you have to do. In that way you can achieve everything.

I always say that it doesn't matter how far you 'want' to go. But you always need to start by taking that first step and that's it.

If you start thinking, ah, I will go to the other part of the world and you forget to make your first step, you will not achieve your mission.

How has a failure, or apparent failure, set you up for later success? Do you have a “favorite failure” of yours?

As always it concerns volleyball.

I'm quite happy with what happened to me, I was quite successful as a player.

But the most painful thing was what we have experienced in our national team in the 80's.

We were all amateurs like I said. And in 1982, we finished 16th at the World championships, we weren't satisfied with that at all, so we decided to make some changes and do like the USA team did for 4 years, life in a training camp, while practicing together all the time.

So we practiced for 18 months, for the first time ever we practiced two times a day, every day, we really lived like pro's.

And we did just finish 6th on the World championships, while our goal was to achieve a medal. It was so sad. I use it as a motivation for myself since then.

Because the journey was beautiful. Really.

We were the first ones to do this crazy thing. Leaving our steady jobs, not living together with our girlfriend or wife, just focused on working together to have a medal at the World championships in France.

And we missed that goal.

It was really painful, but as an experience for my life, it was beautiful.

It was beautiful because I shared it with my friends, we lived together and it was a unique experience that I use to reflect on still now during my coaching career.

This brings us a bit back to the question before, great things don't happen overnight, preparing and giving it enough time are of course important.

It's exactly like that.

When I took over the French national team, everybody was sad because we weren't able to qualify for the London Olympics.

'But are you really motivated to go to the Olympics?' Yeah!

'When did you start your preparation for the Olympics in London?' Ah, we started in April for the Olympic qualification tournaments.

Oh, that's why you didn't go.

We want to go to Rio? That's why we start the first camp, the opening ceremony day of the Olympics in London. Because talking about it, is not for me, doing, is for me.

So we started the preparation for Rio 2016 in 2012.

That gave us 4 years to prepare. That's the meaning of preparing something and giving yourself a chance to succeed.

Do you have a book that you like a lot? Which lessons did you get out of it?

Sports books? As many other coaches also say, I like 'The Talent Code' by Daniel Coyle. Another one is 'Switch: How to change things when change is hard' by Dan Heath.

Switch is about how to make people believe that the place you want to bring them is the place where they need to be. A very interesting read.

And the last one concerning volleyball that we mentioned at the start is Carl McGown's 'Science of coaching volleyball', that book has really impressed me.

Not sports related I read 'every' novel that Michael Connelly has written. Every single one.

My issue at the moment is that I've lost my Kindle on the plane over here. :-)

It's funny that you mention Dan Heath and Switch, I've just read 'Made to Stick'  by the same author. Basically it talks about the concept and examples of why some ideas survive and live on and why others, equally true, disappear. All rooted in how the message gets delivered.

Yeah. 'Switch' talks more or less about the same thing.

If you don't feel or possess the right emotion, the elephant, you cannot bring the elephant where you want, so you have to speak to and create the right emotion.

I learned from reading this book that 'what' you have to say to the group or to the individual player, is not much more important than the moment, the right moment and the way you say it.

That's why I learned to do speeches after matches in the bus, or at the restaurant... not in the locker room or maybe exactly in the locker room, like at the Olympics.

And it's really important to try to understand what helps you to convince players or people, to do what you want.

It's a really interesting read, because after reading it you want to try so many different approaches.

Send me the other book. :-)

That emphasis on the group was always very present when you coached the French national team. A lot of work must have gone into that.

What's important in fact, is that numbers, statistics and logic are not sufficient. It's not enough.

You have to talk about numbers with emotion. You have to use numbers to reinforce your speech. Or you have to say to the players, 'I don't even care about what the numbers say.'

Because I know that during the match, for example Ngapeth if he only even has 10% in attack, he will still be on the court. And if you say to the other players, 'eh, I only base my decisions on numbers', they will say, 'yeah, but why is he playing? And why am I not playing.'

The tricky thing is that you cannot only follow numbers, statistics and logic.

You have to work with your players and your own emotion to have the same 'heartbeat'.

That's what you need if you want to win. That's why these books are very interesting.

Do you have some particular habits and how do you handle pressure?

I'm quite nervous on a game day or even the day before, I really feel the pressure and I have to feel the pressure also. If I don't feel it, I feel bad.

So I like that, but for the rest I do what I do every day more or less.

For game day I write everything down on a paper, I put the list of the players in the right order. Name by name and so on. And if I make a mistake, it's a bad sign. :-)

And sometimes I really need to take a break from volleyball. I love volleyball. I'm passionate about it, but I sometimes need a break, without volleyball, just traveling and being in nature.

That's really, really important to me. I need to feel in-tune with the outside world.

Thank you, Laurent



