Okay, so I start with a center on the net.
Now, in this case, I have an outside right there,
so we can have another center,
but obviously it has to be rotated just a little bit,
not like him.
It means he has to face the net instead of the court.
Okay, he started with the ball in the hands,
ball in the right hand if he can,
so he can anticipate.
He's moving the right foot and the right hand
at the same time, closing in the left,
jumping and throwing the ball.
So at this point where you're throwing,
you're at, okay, now you can stop it just a little bit.
Pause it, yes.
So doing this movement allow you, first of all,
to understand the footwork that sometimes is not,
can be not very natural if you're not used to.
So can help you to figure out which is the rhythm
of your right step and right hand that they like,
anticipating the movement just a little bit
with your right hand.
And I think the end's ready.
And when you're completing the movement,
you're ready to go.
You're ready to go.
You're ready to go.
You know, it's like seeing that your hands are equal.
It's much easier to see.
Sometimes after the set, you see your hands are like,
one hand is going here, one hand is going down.
They're not, they're really weak.
Just hands ready, palms out,
seeing that you're pushing the ball front,
using your thumbs a lot.
Okay, that is the first, the first step of the drill.
Now the next step is going to be the same thing,
but now we're setting.
So it's tossing itself, really easy toss.
Okay.
And now it's doing just two steps, right, left, okay?
It's starting from, you know, two feet from the mat.
It's like 45 degrees, like you see,
it's tossing the ball itself, around him.
It doesn't have to run to the ball,
but just focus on attacking the ball with the right,
closing with the left, jump, facing the target,
and send the ball on the target.
You can play the video, thank you.
Oh, sorry, I missed it.
It's still throwing the ball, but the ball,
he's off, so he's like, he's making few step off and going.
The same movement that we saw earlier when Janelli's,
Bertoli, and Christensen were doing it.
So having these cross step with the left, with the right, sorry,
when the right is start closing and rotating just a little bit,
and the left closing completely in order to have the hips
and the shoulder facing there.
So this is the second movement that they're doing.
Now they're starting how to tossing and sending, okay?
Like you see, it was too early right now.
The ball was dying.
Now it's perfect.
The ball is going on the ping.
So I used to do this, not just with the volleyball.
I use the basketball as well,
because the basketball is just heavier.
And if I want them releasing better with the wrist,
so I worked with a jump set,
and for the stiffness of the wrist as well.
It can be helpful if you want,
but now I was focusing just about the drill and the footwork.
So now he's moving the ball.
The toss is going to be just off the net,
where he's going to the ball, one, two step, and now right left.
Ball on the template line.
And this is exactly the movement that the other player doing.
Now, this is the base.
After that, the next step is going to be
the coach tossing the ball.
Few ball perfect, it will be off.
And then next day will be having someone in libero
and outside passing a free ball with easy ball.
You start passing from zone five, five, six.
So the ball is coming every time in front of the center.
And the next level is going to be setting from zone,
passing from zone one,
when we have to make this complete movement,
staying behind the ball, rotating.
This is the hardest one, obviously.
So this is the progression that they usually do
when they work just with the center to make reps.
And from this one,
you can go wherever you want with some cognitive drill,
having both someone moving on the other side,
giving some tips like where to set and calling the ball,
using visual things.
So there's a lot of job and you can have fun
to make the center struggle, you know, to learn something.
So now this is like why we jump set,
how we jump set and how we teach to jump set,
at least how I teach to jump set that the game
is not the true, but it's one way to do it.
And now the topic I want to talk about,
is like the tactic.
Okay, tactic is really important.
It's like how we apply this during the game.
