===== SESSION: https://volleybrains.com/liam-sketcher/ =====

----- VIDEOS -----
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bXHwNfbVnyc

----- TEXTO -----
4. Liam Sketcher: 'You can’t “fix” players, but you can help them improve.'

Liam Sketcher has been part of the Australian Men's Senior National Team since 2017. On a club level he's currently coaching in Switzerland with one of the top teams over there, Volley Schönenwerd.  Volley|Brains is really focused on delivering articles of coaches with a clear opinion about player development but also about their own. Liam's point of views fit in perfectly. I hope you pick something up.

Liam, when did you decide to commit to being a professional volleyball coach? What pushed you towards that decision?

There was never a concrete plan to become a professional coach, it kind of snuck up on me.

I loved coaching, so if someone would ask me about a good coaching opportunity I would usually say yes and figure out how to make my life fit around it later. I kept making more and more time for it in my life until it made sense that it became more than a hobby.

I was offered an opportunity to leave my hometown and move to the national training center in Australia, so that was probably the tipping point.

In Australia there are very limited options to work full time as a coach, and once I reached a point where I was as full time as I could be in Australia to find more opportunities meant I had to leave and come to Europe.

Do you have a particular goal as a coach? Maybe a goal that you already reached or a goal that is so hard to reach that it gives you daily motivation?

My goal is to have the knowledge that I can help players feel like they have control over their actions on the court.

So there is a necessary blend of technical, game/system awareness, personal management.

Do you have a book that you like a lot? Which lessons did you get out of it?

The Inner Game of Tennis by Timothy Gallwey. It really helped me clarify my ideas about what you are really coaching.

That technique must be in service of a goal, rather than for aesthetics sake.

Additionally that the concept in a player’s head of what the action is, is a much easier place to work than trying to make them become what you are seeing as the coach.

How has a failure, or apparent failure, set you up for later success? Do you have a “favourite failure” of yours?

The step of realising that I fail every day as a coach was actually quite a liberating experience. That we all make lots of tiny failures (and triumphs) each day means you have lots of opportunities to improve as long as you are willing to keep trying to get better.

I don’t see myself as a victim of my failures, but they are a reminder that I am not finished growing yet, just like my players.

So, you are Dr. Frankenstein and have the ability to put together the world's most performing volleyball player. Which at least 5 characteristics would he/she have.

Bruno’s understanding and feel for the game, Poletaev’s explosiveness, N'Gapeth’s attack solutions, Paul Carroll’s leadership, Nehemiah Mote’s humility.

When preparing a new game (next weekend), how does your general approach look like and did you ever change your approach? Why did you change and was the outcome beneficial?

Firstly is determining relevant sample size for scouting, usually the last three or four games of the opponent, pending lineups and other variables.

Then to compare against the larger data from the season. Trying to distill what situations they like to use and the variations thereof.

Always thinking about what is practical and useful information to pass on to players.

The staff can have more information, but everything must be useful to help the players make quick decisions.

Getting athlete feedback was important to helping streamline scouting.

The future of volleyball, how will the game evolve according to your opinion? Will the speed of the game increase? Will there be more emphasis on technical enhancement?

I think that the value of players with well rounded skill sets will increase, speed will remain important, but the speed will be found in other areas.

Having better ball control in transition, less high balls as players become better setters.

More attacks on second contact also.

Middles who hit back row, opposites setting first tempo, receivers setting fast from the pipe position on second contact.

Best game you've ever seen. What recent or game from the volleyball vaults did validate once more that volleyball is the greatest sport on the globe (for all of us). For sure share your opinions about this game, what you took away from it.

The men’s gold medal game from the London Olympics was a great spectacle. Good level of play, two teams who were consistently among the best for the previous decade in the last dance for some of the greats of that period.

A ballsy coaching decision that changed the game. (as also John Cook mentioned in his own article)

But watching Ricardo in the 2006 World Championships Final was a masterclass.

What is one of the best or most worthwhile investments you’ve ever made? (Could be an investment of money, time, energy, etc.)

Taking the time to talk and listen to people, taking the time to give myself a break and do some reflection.

Great ideas and realisations don’t have a timetable.

According to you, what rule change is necessary in the future? And why would you want to see this new rule implemented?

Make using two hands to wipe the ball off the block illegal, it turns the game too far into the favour of the attacker.

Alternately, teams can get better at countermoves, but the advantage would always stay too far on the side of the attacker to make it a fair contest.

Is there a rule change that you want to see turned back? Why is that?

The center line infringement rule, as it is currently the scope for interference (inadvertent or otherwise) is too great and isn’t clear for spectators.

What advice would you give yourself as a starting coach? An advice that is so clear and logical for you now, but that you had to develop over the years.

That there is not only one solution to any problem. You won’t always have an answer straight away, but go find it.

That how a team plays together is just as important as technical and systems knowledge.

Learning how to be yourself as a coach is an enjoyable journey.

If you could have a gigantic billboard anywhere with anything on it — metaphorically speaking, getting a message out to every athlete or coach on the globe — what would it say and why?

Enjoy all the little successes, they add up.

What is an unusual habit or an absurd thing that you love?

The quietness of the gym before it’s filled with people.

In the last five years, what new belief, behaviour, or habit has most improved your life?

Work with ideas that let people take ownership of their own decisions, people want to succeed, don’t limit their options for success.

What advice would you give to a smart, driven college coach about to enter the  “professional coaching world”?

Spend as much time on the people as the game.

You are responsible for a club that has a community of people attached, not just a team.

Be ready to pick some things to compromise on, and not compromise on.

The best organised, resourced and supported volleyball of your life may be behind you, but that is ok.

A follow up to the last question. Maybe even more important, what advice should they ignore? What are bad recommendations you hear about coaching or training volleyball?

There is no one drill or system that is the best, you have to coach the team you have to win.

When you feel overwhelmed or unfocused, or have lost your focus temporarily, what do you do?

Take a break. Listening to music or taking a walk to clear the mind is a great help.

You can grind away, but sometimes coming back with a clear mind is the best way to make progress.

Thanks Liam for your replies!

_____________________________________________________

Today (02/16/2021) the FIVB announced a few adaptations on the current international rules. Here you can read all about it.

Our next article will feature Andrea Anastasi, the current head coach of Polish powerhouse Verva Warszawa.

Don't miss out, SUBSCRIBE to this newsletter on our homepage.✌️👍



