===== SESSION: https://volleybrains.com/self-awareness/ =====

----- VIDEOS -----
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RPO7XsS-5a4
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YGmb32JR6jo
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CZ60-IORL1A
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tHBD-pPAaUY
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=csL6xCh5U8A
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uC34pNsrH9Q
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-JsoZ31p-6s
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Kn2EoFYGU2E
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jIupYyxwq2I
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=P_AqzvrK2Gk
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RdWyjM5x1pM
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XVzou5y32K4

----- TEXTO -----
41. Learning Path 1: Self-Awareness

In our 'Learning Paths' we'll collect valuable concepts and insights which you can find on volleybrains.com. Each learning path will feature a specific subject related to the art of coaching.

🤔  What is a 'Learning Path'?

Each Learning Path will be a true reference document.

🔥 Objectives?

Provide a straightforward way to absorb expert knowledge from previous Masterclasses.

Programs, clubs, schools and federations can use these Learning Paths to offer a condensed and specific way of valuable coaching education.

The learning paths are an entryway to dive deeper into the various Masterclasses.

⚡First topic!

In this first Learning Path we'll go over the many clips and conversations we had about self-awareness and in particular about the answers to a question we've asked to mostly all of our interviewed coaches:

"What advice would you give yourself as a starting coach? An advice that is so clear and logic to you now, but that you had to develop over the years. "

This is a very important topic, that's why it came first.

🏐 Featured coaches.

We selected excerpts and video clips out of our previous Masterclasses AND we also added new clips with Kelly Sheffield, John Cook, Tommi Tiilikainen and Giovanni Guidetti which weren't previously edited.

How much time do you need to go through this? The Learning Path contains 12 video clips with 20+ minutes of video content and another 4500 words...don't be stressed with going through this, take in all of the available insights.

You'll keep on coming back to this one.

So which coaches are in this Learning Path?

17 coaches out of 8 different countries:

🇺🇸 Russ Rose, Alan Knipe, John Cook, Kelly Sheffield, Dave Shondell, Craig Skinner, Tama Miyashiro

🇳🇿 Hugh McCutcheon

🇫🇷 Laurent Tillie

🇮🇹 Giovanni Guidetti, Angelo Lorenzetti, Marco Mencarelli

🇨🇦 Glenn Hoag, Shannon Winzer

🇸🇮 Luka Slabe

🇦🇺 Lauren Bertolacci,

🇫🇮 Tommi Tiilikainen

Thanks to the availability of all the coaches (featured and not featured in here) we were able to produce this Learning Path.

This first topic truly grasps the essence of why we started out with volleybrains.com.

Let's dive in!

Tommi Tiilikainen - Incheon Korean Air Jumbos 🇰🇷

You need to find your 'inner why'. If you have your clear why and you have a clear understanding what the direction is that you're going and hopefully you can make all your decisions with the end in mind.

It's like Stephen Covey talks about in his book, that was a book that really made an impact on me years and years ago, he talked about 'starting with the end in mind'.

('7 habits of highly effective people' Habit 2: Start with the end in mind)

If you're clear why you're doing what you do, what you want to represent and what kind of legacy you want to leave behind, then all the decisions, your daily decisions professionally or non-professionally, those will be much more easy to make.

Obviously I don't know myself a hundred percent. I don't know if you can, but I have a clear idea about what I want to leave behind. That is something on my mind every day.

(Matias here: Tommi and me did riff on what 'legacy' means for the both of us and came to the same conclusion...)

This is not some legacy 'look at me thing', it's for sure NOT that. To give a concrete example, if I can shape the future of volleyball in some beneficial way or form than my work is done.

I never want to be in the headlines or whatever. Being in service of our sport is what it's all about.

Hugh McCutcheon - Minnesota 🇺🇸

I'm going to answer this in two ways.

I think if I was talking to my younger self, I would be...

One, a little more patient. I think there's a tendency when you're young to want stuff to happen immediately.

And then two. Understand that the coaching life is a little more in the gray than it is maybe necessarily black or white.

And I think when you're young, you're afforded the naivete of conviction, you know, like, Hey, this is the way we're going to do it and every other way is terrible.:-)

You know what I mean. These opinions tend to be very polarizing and I think just being open to listening to everything and forming your own opinions about things  is an important part of the coaching process.

But the most important part of that process...and so this is why I'm saying that I'm going to answer it two ways is...

As a young coach, you really need some guiding principles that are gonna help you to...well kind of have evaluative criteria for all the stuff that's out there.

Because there is a lot of stuff out there and not all of it is based in any kind of scientific rigor and much of it is based in tradition or opinion.

So you need some way to separate the wheat from the chaff as it were.

Kelly Sheffield - Wisconsin 🇺🇸

When I look back as somebody that age; I didn't know what I didn't know.

You think you're a good communicator, but then you look back and you find out that wasn't true.:-)

The effort was there and I tried to do the right thing. But I probably wish I would've done things a little bit different in how I was communicating.

Try to help them get to where they're wanting to go. It's all about that.

Early on I was probably talking to them, through...what my goals were. Rather than trying to understand what their goals were and trying to help them get to where they're wanting to go.

Another advice is about learning.

I was always a lifelong learner. And I think that's a really important thing.

Curiosity!

I think that's important for any young coach, well any coach, to ask a lot of questions, to be curious, to learn along the way.

But personally, I think I've always had that in me, so probably for myself the best advice must have been to try to get to know our players better, where they're from, what their idea's about the game are, what their goals are.

Russ Rose - Penn State 🇺🇸

The fact that I'm still watching volleyball now would mean that I haven't figured it all out. I think I've always been a good watcher and a good listener and not an eager talker. I talk when I must talk, but otherwise I'm not interested.

I don't go out to meet new people and meet new friends. I think for some people that sounds like a great activity. For me, I like to bring a book and a cigar and go sit in the sun. :-)

So what have I learned?

What I've learned is you must be yourself and you can't get too high when it's good and you can't get too low when it's not good.

You have to realise that the most important factor in success in coaching is the players, not the coach.

If you have good players, you have a chance. If you don't have good players, you have no chance, but you still have an opportunity to make an impact. And you still have an opportunity to make the unit better, but it may not be enough to make your career advance.

It may not be enough to be significant in the eyes of the person evaluating. So you have to just recognise it's always about the player.

Alan Knipe - Long Beach State 🇺🇸

If you're a smart young coach and you're on a staff, you're not going to agree with everything every head coach does or how he handles a player, how he handles a situation.

But you learn from different coaches, what you like and what you don't like. And that's how you kind of build your toolbox as a coach.

So I would push two things.

Spend as much time around the best coaches and the best organizations you can be part of.

And the other one is be a constant learner and find ways to get better...

whether it's investing in professional growth opportunities, even like what we're doing today, listen to some of these interviews and being part of conventions and coaching clinics.

But also finding time to read, there's lots of great books out there by wonderful people, whether it be coaching or leadership or biomechanics, but constantly find time within a day, within a week, within a month, within a year that you're going to set time aside to try to continue to grow.

Because too many young coaches, specially that were good players, know it all too early. At least they think they do.

And they have to learn the valuable lessons as they go along, that they really don't know it all and they have to kind of learn to learn. They need to open themselves up, kind of let the ego go.

Especially if you were a good player and understand that coaching is very different; open yourself up to the idea that you probably don't know nearly as much as you think you do.

And I think it will be a much smoother introduction into the coaching world than maybe some have.

Glenn Hoag - Arkas Izmir 🇹🇷

So for me it would be to develop the knowledge and the competency, the coaching competency.

So competencies for me are 'an attitude' and 'knowledge' combined together. You need these two to become more confident in what you're doing.

So there's a lot, a lot to be learned. And still to this day, I'm learning a lot through different means, just conversations like we're having right now or conversations with other coaches.

And so these competencies are really important early on, I think because the earlier you will develop them the better you will have an understanding of the world that you're entering as a coach.

In Canada when we do level 4 (higher coaching educational levels), you have different tasks to do like, the strength training tasks that are specific to volleyball, so you work with a strength coach about trying to understand what's happening.

Some tasks with a sport psych, there's also skill work, tactical stuff et cetera. Our athletes respond differently emotionally on different inputs, so also that part is a very important part of coaching.

The more you understand about all of these facets, the more you're able to orient your work on developing the athletes.

And often we still make mistakes. If you don't have enough knowledge, you can still leave it to a specialist. But also specialists can need your help.

I've seen it happen when our national team, I think it was in 2009 when we moved to a new center, and we had an entirely new staff and some of the staff(because in Canada, we don't have a professional league) doesn't have the specific knowledge to volleyball in strength training, the medical aspect, also the sports psych was not that much developed yet.

They were experts in their trait, but missed the connection to pro volleyball.

So I needed to help my staff learn more about what the specific needs were of the sport.

And as we worked together they develop their own competency in their specific field, but they first needed to realise how volleyball works before we could use their expertise to the max.

For me volleyball is a 'touch' sport. It's a very unique sport because it's hard to compare to any other sport. You don't hold the projectile. The projectile stays with you for a very short time. We know when you make a mistake, that you made it, you can't hide it. Nobody can pull your shirt or 'elbow you' or something like this, you cannot hide anything in volleyball.

So there's a big mental awareness effect there also. The psychology of failure in volleyball is super important. If I don't pass well, if I get aced , how do I react after being aced as a receiver?

So how do I work as a coach to give confidence that yes, this will happen. We want to try to reduce the fact that it will happen often, how should the player react on that?

So the ability as a coach to play with those competencies, gives you a better understanding of the environment that you're going to work in.

So that's what my suggestion for a young coach would be.

Don't to skip steps, the more, you know, the better. The more you understand your environment, the easier it will be.

Dave Shondell - Purdue 🇺🇸

It's not about me.

When I was working with the Munciana volleyball club, which is one of the better clubs in our country.  You'd have all these guys that were coming out of Ball State, out of the university there.

It was all about how well 'they' could do. And as you mature as a coach, you realize it's not about 'you'.

It's about developing players and developing people. I've been coaching for about 44 years and it's absolutely all about the athletes.

And sometimes I have to remind people on my support staff of that, because they get upset about something... And I say, we're not here if it's not for those 17 players. We're not at Purdue. We don't have a job if it isn't for the student athletes.

I've always felt like I was coaching and teaching for the right reasons. But the competitive juices sometimes takes coaches and makes them feel it's all about how many matches 'they' win or how many championships that 'they' can win. And what do they look like to the crowd. If they're there coaching at those particular, important matches et cetera...

And so as you get older, you get over that.

And young people, the sooner you do get over that, the better coach you're gonna be and the better teacher of the game and the better mentor you'll be.

Don't worry about those type of things, just do your job.

And you can learn more from the players sometimes than anybody else. You need to listen more to your players.

Again, I didn't do a lot of that when I was young. I do a lot of it now.

This is a relationship business. You're coaching at the college level, these are grown women, they want to be respected and they want to have relationships.

And if they feel like, there's a trust factor between you and them, you're gonna get so much more out of them and their experience is gonna be so much better.

So I think understanding that what we're doing is to try to develop people, develop in our case young women to be able to go out, whether it's to go like Annie Drews and play on the USA Olympic team and win the first gold medal.

Super. If they're gonna go be the best nurse they can be in the Indianapolis hospital system.

Great. But our job is just to get them to where they can have a great career and they can love life, the way that we do.

Laurent Tillie - Panasonic Panthers 🇯🇵

I'm a little bit of a lone wolf, a bit of a'solitaire'. When I started out I was doing the weights program, videos, statistics, I did everything by myself at least for the first 4-5 years.

And I found it difficult to work with a team of coaches. So when I started out I had to do more effort in communicating and sharing information. But you know in the end, because it's my responsibility. I want to keep all of it to myself.:-)

But yes, the lesson for me was; be more focused on communication.

Giovanni Guidetti - Vakifbank 🇹🇷

When I was 23 years old I was an assistant coach in a second league team in Italy. They had a problem with their head coach at the beginning of the season and they asked me to take the team over.

I said, 'yeah, why not?' Of course, I asked advice to my father, my father is a very famous volleyball professor in Italy.

I asked him and he said, 'why not'. Just keep on listening to your players because you are too young to talk too much. :-)

I really believe that in my job, listening is more important than talking. The players can teach us so many things, even things we have no idea about. The vision and the feeling of the individual players are always different, you know?

We as coaches have to be able to absorb all of this.

(Matias: the following isn't mentioned in the clip above, but comes out of Giovanni's Masterclass)

For me I feel that when I coach great players, the world's best, there is this insight that they have that you can't control, you can just enjoy it.

I ask them a specific question after they did an action and they tell me 'don't worry, Giovanni, I see everything'

When I was attacking I 'saw' nothing. :-)

For example when I was coaching Zhu Ting that was exactly how it was. She sees the game differently.

And that brings us back to the sharing of experiences and the art of listening, that is and will stay the number one skill to have as a coach in any sport.

Listening is more important than talking, we are there to give feedback of course, but most of the time it's just our second priority.

John Cook - Nebraska Cornhuskers  🇺🇸

To be a lifelong learner. I just signed up for an online course platform about sport psychology, I just ordered two new books. One about how to understand and coach our current generation of players and then another book about mental performance. I'm constantly studying, reading, learning, you just have to as a coach.

That would be my advice, to be a lifelong learner. And the story I always tell is that during my first year at Nebraska(in 2001), we went undefeated and won a national championship. So I thought, okay, I got this figured out, this is pretty easy.

I can tell you now, 20 years later, there's days I go into that gym, and I'm like, I'm not sure about this, is this the right thing? Or, am I saying the right thing? Are we training the right way?

So really, never stop learning, that is key. It doesn't matter exactly what it is, but keep on doing it.

And there's so many ways to learn now, books, courses over Zoom, other webcasts, you name it.

I signed up for the AVCA webcast. I've listened to Luka (Slabe), I listened to Hugh (McCutcheon), I listened to Erin (Virtue) who talked about setters.

My entire staff is doing this also. Maybe there are a couple things we pick up that's going to help make us better.

Craig Skinner - Kentucky 🇺🇸

I probably wasn't very patient when I was younger.

I was trying to get to the next thing faster and trying to get to the next skill quicker.

And, you know, I think you need to spend more time, on whether it's teaching a skill or teaching a system for your team.

I was doing drills all over the place... and I think you have to have a core set of drills that you feel are important for your particular team. And you need to do them over and over and over again.

For two reasons, one to improve, but secondly, to develop confidence in your players.

And if you do different drills every day in practice and there's no continuity between days and weeks, then it's harder for players to get better.

And it's harder for players to develop confidence in themselves and the team.

So I was just pretty impatient. Both as a coach and then also professionally, I just wanted my career to go a little bit faster than it was.

Tama Miyashiro - Team USA 🇺🇸

Which advice would you give to your younger self...(or what do you look out for yourself, as you're in essence a young coach 🙂)

Yeah, I think I have a lot of them.

First is that you always have to be aware that people don't necessarily learn like you do.

So things that worked for me are not going to work for everybody else. Drills that work for some groups are not going to work for all the groups that you coach.

I think some people are going to be like, of course, but you don't realize...it is very natural to coach how you were taught and how you learned.

"I learned a lot when they taught me like this and so let's see if it works."

And sometimes it does. And I think that's an interesting thought about players who become coaches, right?

Some people say:" Oh, you did it, so you know, so much about it."

I understand that and I think it does help. But then at the same time, that's a super common, but easy trap.

You have to always be looking for ways to teach better. You have to always be looking for ways to deliver instruction, to give feedback, because for sure no queue works for everybody.

And I think the best coaches, at least the ones I've played for and I've listened to, can do that in many different ways.

And so kind of looking at that in my young coaching career is, you know, I can have a plan to try to coach someone in some specific situation or skill.

And in my head it's so clear, yes, we're going to get it. And then you tell them and they give you the blank look.

And you're like, okay, that didn't work, time to move on. Next one, next attempt.

And not to give praise to myself, but I had this personality where if you told me one time that you don't want me to stand here, that's all you needed to tell me and I will do it. But not everybody has that and that's okay.

So realizing that our ability to process information for all the athletes that we work with is so different. Always taking that into consideration.

I think another thing would be that commitment looks a little different for people.

I've been around groups that, you know, the question is, well, how come we're not all doing the same thing if we're in it.

It looks very different for people and their understanding and the way they process, what's important is so different.

So that "culture" part is always, it always needs to be talked about or revisited.

But I think it's important to not assume that we all love volleyball 24/7 because 'we' did, you know, I think that's one thing that I see a lot and I've coached kids in high school and some college players and awesome professionals.

It's always a work in progress.  I think that is maybe the bigger lesson.

Quotes and written answers

From our initial interviews.

Angelo Lorenzetti - Trentino Volley 🇮🇹

Angelo's quote:

"Dear Angelo, remember that the players are the main actors of the show. You are at their service. You have to help them to bring out the best in themselves."

Luka Slabe - NC State

Luka's quote:

Take a deep breath before you speak. Surround yourself with loyal people and people who are smarter than you are. Never go to bed with a pain in your stomach.

Shannon Winzer - Canada women's NT 🇨🇦

I would tell myself that it’s okay to not have all the answers right now.

That I will find the freedom to coach true to myself as soon as I accept that I will forever be learning and challenging my current way of thinking and doing things.

I will make mistakes, a lot of them actually, but those mistakes in the end will make me a better coach.

So sit with those mistakes long enough to learn from them. Then let it go.

This process will not be easy, it is extremely important to surround yourself with good people who have good intentions and want to be a part of that process.

Get rid of those who don’t serve the program and team.

Lauren Bertolacci - Swiss women's NT 🇨🇭

It’s easy to feel embarrassed when you go for it and you fail spectacularly, but if you don’t do that you truly can’t take the next step.

Don’t underestimate your actions, words and body language on a players mental state.

If you want them to play an aggressive game, they must feel free to do it. Players can have all the tools available to them, but their mental state needs to be good enough to execute it.

We play within a set of rules that are defined by the sport itself, but human nature dictates that we play with restrictions put on us as well.

Those may be things the coach is telling us, the traditions of the game or what we learned growing up through the sport.

I want to encourage players to think different, and as coaches we don’t want to limit our players. Many barriers we face are real, but some are just expectations.

We want to teach the players how to take risks and how to get better at executing those plays.

The second big thing is creating relationships. I jumped into Head Coaching without a lot of experience in the field, so people around me were very quickly my biggest resource.

Those that you work with are immensely valuable and to succeed you must be able to get the most out of every individual, player or staff. Be vulnerable, it builds trust and enhances communication.

The moment you believe you know everything, is the moment you close yourself off from people that can help you become a better coach.

Have a big picture, work backwards to get there, and continue to improve your processes.

Marco Mencarelli - Technical Director of the Italian female National youth teams  🇮🇹

The advice I would give myself when reviewing my career can be summed up in...

"Grasping the essence of people before skills".

I consider this important both in the choice of players and in the members of my staff.

However, at the beginning of my career I believed that skills were the main determinants. Skills are certainly important but they can be developed at any time.

The personality, the character and the ability to stay balanced make the difference in succeeding in competition and in developing your own skills.



