===== SESSION: https://volleybrains.com/dan-friend/ =====

----- VIDEOS -----
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7pSD43NeNsA
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZkO7egT4pEU
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8pG_216ffUs
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=J0NbC-77Ns0
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ioMEbmSyFyA
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nhJ9qIL3LcI
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sWMhFRsEehY
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zCuWxjRYoyE
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=k_I1OYUpeOc
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Dxybsn8v8Co
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=By_r2qkakIg
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5a23_ZMEK9I
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uCgQCI7Smts
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1Gi2w9iK_yY

----- TEXTO -----
43. Dan Friend:'No fear of failure. Go after it.'

Dan Friend is the head coach of the Lewis University men’s volleyball program since 2004. He is in his 26th season overall as a collegiate head coach. In 2015 after becoming the runner up in the National Championship Dan was nominated as the AVCA coach of the year.

Both in the 2019 and the 2021 season Lewis arrived in the semifinals of the National Championship.

Dan has served in various roles for USA Volleyball. Supporting USA Men's Volleyball for the VNL  but also coaching the USA Volleyball Youth National teams. And he is the current NCAA Division I/II men’s representative for the AVCA (American Volleyball Coaches Association).

In this Masterclass Dan goes very deep into how he goes about integrating his incoming freshman into both the new athletic and the academic environment that they need to adapt to.

He goes into great detail how he goes about the athletic and personal development of his players, he's also very specific about the intricacies that go into match preparation and so much more...

Enter Dan.

Dan, why did you decide to commit to being a volleyball coach? What pushed you towards that decision?

I always knew I wanted to be involved in college athletics or athletics. I got my undergrad in sports medicine or physiotherapy in terms of my degree.

When I was in college I played club ball. There were way less programs when I went to college than what there is now, so I didn't play at an actual university.

It was very different. I grew up in the middle of the country and there was no boys volleyball. So I kind of got involved a little bit different. Some people showed me how to play. And then when I got to college, played some club volleyball, so kind of fell in love with the sport and had the opportunity to help out our women's team at the university.

I got my undergrad finished, was working for a doctor doing some rehab, but I was still coaching at the university where I got my undergrad at.

And I decided...I wanna coach.

At that time I was coaching women's. I enjoyed the sport and was still playing a ton, like outdoor beach stuff, things like that.

I went and got my master's because I knew I had to have my master's here to coach in college. So I went to do that. And when I was done, I was 25 and there was a school that wanted to start a men's program at a university in Wichita, Kansas, which I was close to.

So I went, I got that job, started the men's program from scratch coaching the women at the same time. And that's kind of how I got into it. Was there for about 3 years running both programs, had some success there and ended up at Lewis and have been here 19 years now.

It certainly flies by. I think the reason I probably stayed and gravitated to the men's side was the physicality of the game.

I really enjoyed that and the fact that I came from an area that didn't really have men's volleyball and was lucky enough to, you know, get to Lewis.

We built a pretty good program here, I enjoy seeing young people mature and thrive and get better and not only in volleyball, but just become better people.

And I'm fortunate enough to have a lot of guys that are married now and have kids. So that's pretty cool to see.

More than anything, that's important to me, seeing them become successful hopefully on the volleyball court, but more importantly in life.

Do you think that men's college volleyball can piggyback on the popularity of the women's game? And would you have stayed a women's coach if you knew about the meteoric rise women's college ball would undergo?

Yeah. I think it's tough. I certainly think there are certain areas where you try to use the popularity, but I don't think men's volleyball is ever gonna catch up in that realm.

Women's volleyball is the equivalent of like a football, they are able to take these resources and kind of really push it.

Men's volleyball to some point is just trying to hang on.

I think we've had more growth in the past 5 or 10 years than we've had in the 30 years previous. So that's been a good thing. And that's because there's a few handful of actions that have really helped push it, whether it's AVCA or First Point or some of these other things. But I don't think you're ever gonna see that.

I think for me, when I got into volleyball I had the opportunity to coach men and I kind of fell in love with it.

It wasn't like I didn't enjoy coaching women.

I told you before what I enjoy is the athleticism that the men bring. If I were ever to move to the women's side, it would probably have to be that division I, top 20, because I enjoy that physical component of the game so much.

I've had some chances. I've had people come after me and say, Hey, do you wanna come here or do this?

But the idea of being able to kind of help the men's game grow and continue to grow is pretty important to me.

And we have a pretty good synergy going on here. My wife played division I, but she coaches here and it's a division II school and she really enjoys that level. It's not as like as 'grind out'...kids are already back in school. There's a balance with it. And she can recruit in four state areas.

And then on my side I get to coach the highest level with the men.

And so we have this nice synergy in terms of what we both want to do.

And there's also something to be said about being at a program for a long time. You don't see it as often as you used to where somebody's at a program for 30 years.

As I've been here longer and longer, it's a pretty cool legacy to eventually leave behind and a lot of kids that you've helped in the same spot.

So there's a lot to be said for that.

So I think all that stuff kind of matriculated to where I am mentally now in terms of continuing to be on the men's side of the game.

What advice would you give yourself as a starting coach? An advice that is so clear and logic for you now, but that you had to develop over the years.

Be patient. Don't try to fix everything right away.

I still try to do it at times now, but when I was younger, I was always...I gotta fix this problem now. 🙂

Listening a little bit more is important, taking a step back, being patient, maybe watch how things develop a little bit, whether that's the volleyball on the court stuff or just life stuff sometimes.

And so I think as I've gotten a little bit older, I've gotten a little bit better with that. Kind of waiting to see how things grow or change.

And then as I need to change, make the change and not be so quick to make that move sometimes when I maybe don't need to.

Do you have a particular goal? Maybe a goal that you already reached or a goal that is so hard to reach that it gives you daily motivation? Can be personal on a team or club level, or all of those.

I think my goals have changed as I've gotten older and had a kid. I think when I started out, I was always trying to prove myself.

In the sense of like kid from Kansas, didn't really come from the normal volleyball background. Didn't play professional, barely, you know, had volleyball in college.

And so I was always trying to prove that I belonged and the best way I knew to do that is to continue to grind away and put the kids that I was in a position of coaching to be successful.

I've kind of let go of that a little bit as I've gotten older.

I mean, we're always trying to compete at a high level and certainly we wanna compete for conference and national championships and certainly way back in my head, it's like, I wanna win it all.

And so that's back there.

But I think the goals become more short term in the sense of what's in front of me now, at this moment.

How do we get a great recruiting class? How do we make the kids that are currently playing for us, have a great experience, as well as see themselves improve and become better?

So those start to become the short term goals in terms of what I'm doing with the program.

And then, you know, at the same time, I think how am I making myself and my family better.

We have a six year old daughter.

She was a Micro-Preemie. So she was born one pound eight ounces at 24 weeks. We have a foundation called Rae Strong. So certainly I do some things with that. How do I help people that go through the same issues?

We have an endowment that we have with the program, that we started in the pandemic. The goal is to raise 500,000 dollars in 5 years and we're at 465k in 2 years. So now we've moved that goal to 750k.

I put these things on my plate and I wanna all see them continue to be successful and fruitful.

So those become goals of a personal nature, trying to continue to make that next step better.

I think it's important to try to make an impact.

Volleyball's been really good to me. I sit on the AVCA board as the men's DI/ DII rep. I was on the All American committee, I'm on another couple things.

And so it's all about, how do I continue to make impacts and make people better around me and continue to grow the sport and continue to help my family at the same time.

So I think I gave you a lot in the terms of just what I look at from a broad spectrum. I don't know that I write all of that down, but I do often reevaluate where I am and what I'm trying to do.

How do you go about instilling culture both from an organisational and  a day by day point of view? How do you structure that all out at Lewis?

We've got a lot of things that are like checks and balances and things that are in place to help the young guys that come in.

So if you start out with a young guy, all our young guys have big brothers. You come in and even in the summer before you come in, you get introduced to your big brother and they kind of help with pitfalls or things to watch for, teachers to take classes with. What does coach mean when he says this. Et cetera.

So these big brothers are a nice resource for them as they get into that first year. And that's a big thing.

We've got 'goal books' that we give all our guys as well as journals. The goal books have my philosophy and some rules in them.

We also do task lists once a week. And these task lists are divided in 3 mental, 3 skill based and 3 outside of volleyball tasks.

So maybe you put in: Hey, I wanna improve my step close attacking. Well, how do I do that? 'I need to be consciously aware that the ball's in front.'

So you give an action item and then how you're gonna achieve it. Some of these tasks that are outside tasks can be, Hey, I'm gonna study for this physics test. I might get two extra study sessions in.

This task list they do once a week, they have to come by my office and stop by every Monday to Tuesday, take 5 minutes, show me their task list, revisit a little bit.

It does a couple of things. It makes them put their collective thoughts in order for the week. It also forces them to have a conversation with me because incoming freshmen, when they come in they are scared of me and they don't wanna talk to me.

So this kind of breaks down that barrier a little bit. That's one really good one we've been doing for a long time.

We also set up study halls 4 times a week for their studies, which is really nice, all the incoming freshmen have to do that. And then anybody below a certain GPA has to do that also.

I do meetings twice a semester with them that are half an hour, 40 minutes long just to go through these series of questions and check on them.

And I think mental health has become a really important thing now. So we're really trying to make sure they're doing okay. Especially guys that are from a farther distance and homesick.

The guys do a good job of looking after each other also. I've been blessed that we've got this really good family culture.

And the nice thing about the wife coaching the women's team is both these teams are also super supportive of each other. Both at the games they go watch, but at the same time because they become friends.

We've had multiple players get married over the years. We've got one happening in a month. So I just think there's an interwoven mix with those 2 teams. And I think that kind of helps and is a support structure too at the same time.

But yeah, I think we certainly do a good amount of things for the guys, as they come in and as they continue to be here to kind of help them be in a good space and put some organisational tools in front of them, because it's a lot coming at them.

Certainly with the pandemic, that was a struggle with things being shut down and we lost maybe a few more guys than we normally do, but I think that was just the byproduct of how things were going and what guys were dealing with.

And we're still trying to figure out good ways to tackle some of those things.

We have an app that we use that's called Neurofuel.

It is something that Kirsten Booth from Creighton created with a doctor there, it's been a really good thing for us, and it's very volleyball specific, it talks about visualization, building blocks, it also goes over different breathing techniques.

So we jump into that side also.

We make every one of our incoming freshmen read 2 books, one's called 'The Inner Game Of Tennis' and the other one's called 'Four Agreements'. And with both those books, they have to do these one page reflections and give them to me. And we talk about it a little bit.

Every year we read a team book and we go through that book and all the guys do a one page reflection, and then we kind of correlate it to the team, and how we can use it that year.

Another thing we do is this positive/negative round table discussion.

So each guy does a positive and a negative for another guy, and then we compile them all. We sit around a round table, a guy gets the sheet of paper that shows all these positives, all these negatives. And he goes through them.

And he is like, well, Hey, what do you guys mean by this?

Having a bunch of guys open up in front of each other about some personal stuff, it certainly helps break down some of the barriers and those create a bond and a kind of closeness. I think that's a tough thing to do for any grown man, but let alone 18 to 22 year olds.

Those are a handful of things we do to stay on top of this stuff.

You mentioned a lot of interesting stuff. We could go deeper on all of them. The round table one for example, I can see that going wrong real quick also. What is your experience with that?

It's gotten heated sometimes.

And so I just have to direct it. I try not to jump in too much, but when it kind of gets heated for a little bit, we kind of direct it.

But it also teaches them about conflict. How do you approach conflict and not be scared of conflict. I'm big about that.

When something is bothering you, there's a right time to bring it up, but you also can't bag it and then put it away, because it's going to start to fester.

So you have to learn how to have those difficult conversations because in the end it just makes you better. It makes the team better.

It makes your relationship better. It's really important.

When preparing the new game, how does your general approach look like and did you ever change your approach?

Well, so I think you're always trying to tweak things.

I'll just kind of walk you through what we do, but I'm not sure I could explain to you all the changes I might have done in 20 some years.

Because every year I'll ask the guys for feedback. It's like, Hey, is that too much info? Do we need to dial back? And that's not even at the end of the year, that's constantly.

How do we streamline information, but give the value of enough information that makes us better and puts us in a position to be successful.

So I think that's an evolving process. And if you're a coach, that's set in your ways and not evolving as the game changes, I think you're putting yourself a step behind. I think you're always looking to find, Hey, how do I make this a little bit better? What's the right information flow? Where am I at?

You might have some best practices, but I think I'm always looking to make it better and be open to ideas.

But typically for us, like if we just got done playing on a weekend, playing on a Saturday, the guys' notes from those games would be due to me on Sunday.

So they'd send me notes about: This is what I saw. And it doesn't matter whether you're a starter or number 20. Everybody's gotta send me notes and these can maybe be on some things that we did good, some things that we need to work on in general and then position specific stuff as well.

So those are due around Sunday. That also helps me formulate practice from a broad spectrum about what I might be working on.

And then I encourage them on that Sunday, Monday to start looking at the teams that we are gonna play coming up, especially the first match that's played on a Thursday or Friday.

And then we give them a one pager that outlines, the opponents key guys and a few bullet points and maybe a couple hitting charts that are generated from VolleyMetrics.

So on Monday they're starting to get some information about the opponent in front of them.

And then basically on Wednesday and Thursday, we kind of start going through the real scouting reports.

We do film on Monday on ourselves from the previous weekend before we hand that one pager. So we can put a book end on the weekend. So it's about, Hey, this is what we saw. This is what we talked about.

So there we're turning the page on what we are improving on and what we're doing ourselves.

And then when we get to that film on Wednesday, it's usually about the opponents hitters and their offense and what it looks like for the most part, so that we can start to game plan on our defensive side.

When we get into Thursday, it's more about the opponents serve receive, and kind of what they do on defense a little bit, before we walk into the match on Friday.

The scouting report is about a 20 page PowerPoint that we do. And you're like, wow, that seems really long. But they're used to it. There's some pictures, there's graphs. So there's quite a bit of information and data that kind of sits in there.

When they first come in, they can barely take any of it. By the time they graduate, it's smooth and they know what's going on from that standpoint.

We also put ownership on every position.

Libero's fill out their servers and what their tendency is. And they run the film during the group video session on that, our setter talks about the opponents defense and what we wanna run offensively. And then the hitters are kind of made up sometimes of different individual guys that might put up some notes and we also share the notes of our assistant coaching staff.

So we break everything apart and make the guys have ownership about doing the scouting report. It's not just like me and coach doing everything and just laying everything out for them.

It forces them to be aware and be involved in the process, which I think correlates to them being better on the court.

Always the tough part is when we play 2 different teams on a Friday and Saturday.

When the game gets done on Friday we give our guys the one pager at the end of the game. If there's something pretty unique with the second team that we play on a Saturday, we might cover it early in the week, but I'm pretty big about just focusing on the first match that's in front of us.

I certainly am a fan of Thursday - Saturday games, because then it gives you that day in between and there's a little bit of extra time then.

But on average we do 3 film sessions a week and that doesn't include the end of it.

I watch tape with our setters a couple times a week. I'll usually pick another position and kind of rotate, maybe it's middles or outsides or liberos. We do a good amount of film during the week whether it be on the previous match we just played or as we work towards the next weekend.

On game day, we'd have the serve and pass that day. The serve receivers would have film together to go over the servers again for about 15 minutes.

Setters came to me this year and we watched for about 10 minutes, just to say: Hey, we're on the same page offensively. And then the middles used to go to our assistant, but they came to me as well this year. We would be like, okay, Hey, this is what we're doing. In these situations, this is where we read block and where we're gonna commit.

So we just go over the game plan again, and that was pretty constant throughout the year for the most part.

Gotta make sure I don't forget it...🙂

So visualization became a big thing too.

On our game day, we do a visualization during the warmup period when the other team's going, or right before we start the coin toss.

It's like 4 to 5 minutes long and I run through some scenarios.

And then there's a quick kind of hype video we do where we show them this video, the previous game, where guys are smashing balls and they get hyped up.

When you do the game review of your previous game, do you stay broad, do you go into player specific issues?

I have no problem calling somebody out in front of the team. I'm kind of sarcastic about that. Do you know what I mean? So I kind of break the ice a little bit, but I don't have a problem calling guys out sometimes.

I'm not degrading ever. We don't do that.

But if something's happening and if your senior All American outside is doing this, and the freshman's watching and he sees that I don't have a problem kinda getting on him a little bit and holding him accountable. The freshman is like, Hey, I gotta be better at this.

And so why waste and do it by myself in the office when all of a sudden there's some value to the other guys seeing kind of, Hey, I gotta make this better. I gotta correct this.

So that's how we do it and how we hold each other accountable.

But there's also a teaching moment that the whole team needs to see so that I don't have to repeat myself later on.

So I think some of it is team stuff, so that we're on the same page. And then some of it will be individual skill stuff. It's like, Hey, we're chasing on our passing and we're not leading with our shoulders.

We wanna make sure the whole team's aware of this so that when we're working on it during that day, that everybody can work on at the same time.

So there's a good enough balance with that.

And then at the same time, if something comes up and they rip me, I gotta take it too. Because it just goes both ways.

Exactly keep it all in the open, totally on the same page with you. It's all about being clear and consistent.

I think there's a big piece about me showing vulnerability in situations.

There's things that come up throughout the year where I share life experiences or where I did something stupid, or even do something stupid now.

So I think if you're sharing your vulnerability with the guys, they see that and they see that that's okay.

I had a rough year. My dad died this year. The season was rough. There was stuff that just went on and it's like, the guys need to be aware of that. I told the guys, and I appreciate their support.

I said, I'm gonna have some rough days. And I need you to be aware of that.

I'm so much better about that now than I was 10 - 15 years ago.

And I think that it helps them become better young men, at the same time. And I don't think, if I was coaching pro, I don't think that would change.

As a coach you show your vulnerability, you show that we're not infallible and it's like, Hey, I can make myself better and you can make yourself better.

I think that's an important concept as a coach.

According to you, what rule change could help our game out? Why and how would you want to see this rule implemented?

I think the serve ends the rally too much.

And so how do we put that within a rule that helps us become a more attractive game?

I certainly love aggressive serving and I love guys being able to pass those balls.

So how do you keep some of that, but make it a little bit better? Because I think that's a big part of our game and coaches have different philosophies. Some coaches are like, Hey, I need that you're going after it. And it's an ace or an error because we can't have an easy pass and the ball come back at us.

And other coaches are a little bit more like, Hey, we're gonna put balls in good spots and create opportunities.

But how do you change that rule wise? Do you raise the net a little bit? That changes maybe how the game looks, because teams will have to back off a little bit.

I'm not a 100% sure, but I think that's the thing you wanna play with a little bit.

How do we get this to where we're playing more volleyball, like the girls are playing more volleyball.

And there's so many physical guys that are swinging and setting and who you see go super fast.

The past year and a half for example it's been the big guy jump setting to the pins because that's been the newest kind of fad or even outdoor you're seeing the fake two ball jump set Swedish guys going to the pins.

Do you know what I mean? So the creativity's been pretty cool to see with some of this stuff.

And you can't see that when you're missing the serve every other time.

I think that would be the one for me that comes to mind where it's like, how do we change a little bit.

I'm always surprised by the bic (pipe) that has gotten so fast now, teams are running it like almost zero tempo at times. And the middle fade and drift routes have become big in the past 3 or 4 years.

Now middles, aren't just going straight up, but they jump and fade away, so do they start doing that with the pins? The pins are now fading from one point to the other point? That could be the next one.

Guys are so physical from that standpoint. Some of that stuff we try to mimic, we try to run the bic a little faster if we have the right personnel.

But it's so much personnel driven, what pieces do you have that can do what.

We ran a 6-2 this year and people were like, what are you doing? Cause both our setters were 6'7'' or 6'8''. We didn't have an opposite, but both of them could swing a little bit.

So that was back to old school days.

Best game you've ever seen. What recent or game from the volleyball vaults did validate once more that volleyball is the greatest sport on the globe.

So the first one will probably be a match that I was part of.

The match in 2015 when we lost in the national championship, 23 - 21 in the 5th game.

So to be part of that match was pretty, I mean, if you ever get to go watch it, it's pretty back and forth. We were down in the 5th game.

I wanna say like 5 or 6 points, 8 - 13 or something like that. And we came back and we pushed it to extra points.

There was one play that happened that I thought we won the whole thing but we didn't. And so talking about the range of emotions of that game, I just can't go back and watch it anymore. 🙂

I watched those final plays like a 100 times, but to think back about it and how good of a volleyball match it was, it was pretty good.

Another moment for me was when I was probably 20 or 21, I was at a beach tournament in Aspen, Colorado. And there was this guy named Curtis.

They were playing maybe the semifinals or the finals, but I saw him set a ball while he was laying on his back. It might be the most incredible play I had seen and since then it stuck in my head.

He fell down, he's flat on his back. And this guy is probably about 6'6'', 6'7'' and just sets a 'butterball' to his teammate who crushes it.

And it was a big point.

It's funny because to me it's more about iconic plays versus full matches where I have the best memory of.

I mean, I watched Karch win gold when they went to that first Olympics on the beach side.

Another fun one was watching our USA men's team beat Brazil in a VNL game. So that was a fun match to be a part of.

I remember Lloy Ball and both Riley Salmon and Reid Priddy chipping away and whacking balls off the arms and winning that match.

And so I think there's more kind of moments versus like whole matches for me that really stick with me.

A question I like to ask to coaches from the States is how they handle their timeouts. Over here in Europe it's the head coaches time to shine...in the college game it's a bit different.

So typically what happens is, the timeout gets called whether it's them or us, we let the guys go to the bench and gather themselves, the setters come to me.

Not only the starting setter on the court, but if we have one or two backups, they come to me as well.

If we have something quick, we chat, then I go with the coaches and then the coaches chat... all together real quick.

Sometimes if I gotta talk to the setters longer, we won't chat and the assistant coach will just go talk to the guys. But we give the guys like 30 seconds to kind of grab some water, have a seat, gather themselves.

Sometimes there might be an older guy or a captain that might speak to the group when they come out if they need to, sometimes they don't say anything.

So it's kind of relaxed and streamlined.

If it's a timeout and we suck, I won't let them sit down. They come off the sideline and I'm just like, what are you guys doing?

That doesn't happen very often, but has happened.

But usually there's a flow. Setters to me. Then I meet with my assistants. Then we go talk to the guys.

Sometimes it's me. Sometimes it's the assistant, that kind of just depends on what's going on for the most part. And then we're out of there.

If you could have a gigantic billboard anywhere with anything on it — metaphorically speaking, getting a message out to every athlete on the globe — what would it say and why?

No fear of failure. Go after it.

Don't be afraid to fail. Get better. Fail. Go again.

No fear. It's a big thing for me. It's how I've lived my life.

So you kind of go after it and you get better and you learn and you go after it again.

I think that's important.

Do you have a book that you like a lot? What books or other resources have shaped your coaching over the years.

I reach out to coaches a lot of times, so Kevin Hambley at Stanford I always shoot him a text right before the season.

Like, Hey, what are you guys reading this year? And he's always got something good, he's a big book reader.

But I think this process that we've done with the team over the past 10 years has been very good.

We read the Kobe Bryant book, we read Andre Agassi last year. It was really good for the guys.

I'm reaching out to Kevin to always kind of get suggestions. He's a much bigger reader than I am, and there's a couple other coaches that I'll reach out to and just be like, Hey, what are some good books that you like?

'The Captain Class' was really good also.

The author went out and interviewed the 20 - 30 best teams in the world across sports and kind of ended up figuring out how they chose captains. And he narrowed it down to these 10 best teams in the world.

So I would recommend that for sure.

When you feel overwhelmed or unfocused, or have lost your focus temporarily, what do you do?

Oh wow. I was gonna tell you, this year I felt overwhelmed.

I tend to watch movies like Netflix, Amazon Prime, I download something or watch it or just kind of binge on it and kind of, you know, then I'm not worried about everything else that's going on or all the other stuff.

I still tend to try and play volleyball these days, usually beach. So I'll play beach in the summer 3 days a week, 4 days a week when I'm not traveling or doing something. And I'm certainly physically nowhere near where I wanna be anymore, but they still let me hack around a little bit, which is nice of those guys.

During the year I play basketball twice a week. It's called STAFF, I'm on athletic staff basketball. So I play twice a week and I'm probably still overly competitive sometimes in terms of that, you know what I mean?

But those are some of my releases a little bit, so just a little bit of TV and trying to work out at times when I can, which is, I think pretty important to me.

So that's outside of family time, of course. I love spending time with my daughter. Lately we've been going to a place here that is called Chucky Cheese. It's an arcade.

My daughter likes it and I like games. So that works out well.

Thanks coach.

Before our interview Dan asked me why I've gotten in contact with him for a volleybrains.com interview.

Probably he had seen the Olympic gold and hall of fame coaches' interviews and had the humble curiosity why he was part of the coaches we wanted to feature.

Volleybrains wants to be a resource of coaching experiences.

An experience can be winning an Olympic gold medal and everything that was needed to get there.

An experience also means, how did you go about coaching in Japan as a non Japanese speaker.

An experience also means, you coached a pro team in Europe with very limited resources and grew into a title contender with a budget that was peanuts compared to your opponent...

You get where we're going with this.

Some experiences lead to medals and fame, some experiences lead to failure and recalibration...all experiences are there to shape you.

Now what did I tell Dan?

Dan's bio alone should already tell you that he has a few things to say about training and coaching volleyball...but again I respected the humility. 🙂

Possibly you will have read somewhere that we run a volleyball athlete representation agency.

That means that we have our 'ear to the streets' over here in Europe.

I was told by a Lewis alumnus that Dan Friend eats, sleeps and breathes volleyball but more importantly he told me that Dan has shaped the lives of the young men that he has coached...

Shaping lives? Yes, that is...an experience.

Next article on volleybrains:

Undecided. 😇 Could be a Masterclass, could be a practice video series, could be something else...all in production.

Enjoy your day!



