===== SESSION: https://volleybrains.com/davide-mazzanti-talk/ =====

----- VIDEOS -----
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=y42gl1ILbBs

----- TEXTO -----
44. Davide Mazzanti: You are born a champion.

This article is one that we wanted to create for a while. In creating Davide Mazzanti's Masterclass we stumbled upon this gem of a TedxTalk he did.

The World Championships started 2 days ago and Italy's women's team should be considered the team to beat. They won the European Championship in 2021, the VNL a few months ago and probably have the most well rounded group of players around.

Why now?

It's a great moment in time to look back at how Davide thinks about the different challenges that a coach must focus on. How do you handle desires and expectations.

The clip being 3 years old and Italy's success since that period...well probably there is some gold in here. (pun intended 🙃)

⚡ The translated TEDxTalk:

There is packed a lot in these 12 minutes. Let the video run, but keep your finger on the pause button...if you're a native English speaker you won't be able to keep up with the speed of the subtitles otherwise.

A few key points:

Davide focuses on the following 3 challenges:

The challenge to be yourself, getting to know who you are and what you stand for. Being 100% authentic.

The challenge with your environment, your team. Naming things and roles what they are.

The challenge with your opponent. The opponent is just the yardstick to know where we have arrived, the competition with yourself is what really counts.

My own fav excerpt:

Other great coaches talks:

Also take a look at our article that we did with Hugh McCutcheon when we showcased and talked about his Ted talk.

For a refresh on Davide's journey and how he goes about coaching, you'll find his Masterclass over here. 👍

Coming up next:

Masterclass with Silvano 'Il Professore' Prandi.

Coach Prandi didn't steal his nickname. We talked for over 3 hours and we're loving the process to get the best out of that conversation for you.

Silvano's active coaching career stretches over 5 decades and is still running.

From getting the Bronze gold medal at the 1984 Los Angeles Olympics as the head coach of the Italian men's team to winning numerous cups and championships in France the last few years with Chaumont and all the Italian super clubs he coached in between...

At 74 years old he has a lot to tell...and we are glad that we can share his message.

Coming up after:

After that it's 'practice time' once more.

Expect to get a narrated practice session with one of the best men's pro club teams in the world.

Volleybrains is giving away free roundtrips (not literally 😇) to one of Italy's and the world's volleyball capitals.

Enjoy your day.



