===== SESSION: https://volleybrains.com/silvano-prandi/ =====

----- VIDEOS -----
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6ecTmQEEkHA
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eRgtLQOG7Lc
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hP66r5GbntI
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sCscVqR54zk
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0yGCrFldTq4
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JxbNHpBqh34
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PeSjB9Q9_iU
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cq6YBrkuLAo
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RbCxUF7jwDQ
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wHCYlhFHJ0A
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BZVhv6nx2yI
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=55EnSVCDFXk
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oNKhOYrM0No
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AAdPUHCZSNY
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=r8yUajzBSKI
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pPZ2k6Hp79E
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Noca9emd6w8
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ijWYCJcw5ao
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1Vx7g4ro8lI

----- TEXTO -----
45. Silvano Prandi: 'Not doing things well doesn't give me satisfaction. And without satisfaction it's useless to do things'

Silvano Prandi, 46 years ago, started to coach at the highest level. His story started in Turino, Italy. He was the first Italian coach to take the jump into professionalism.

From Turino winning national and European championships, he went on to coach the Italian men's NT to a Bronze medal at the 1984 Olympics in Los Angeles.

For the next 25 years Silvano became a household name in the top clubs of Italian volleyball, being the architect of many successes. In 2008 he became the head coach of the Bulgarian men's NT and from 2013 on he's coaching French pro club teams.

From 2015 on and still currently he's coaching the French powerhouse Chaumont.

We had a great and long talk with Silvano.

Regular readers will know that we are fans of 'real' coaching talk but we also don't shy away from some coaching and life philosophy. This Masterclass with 'mister' Prandi is filled to the top with both of those.

Enjoy!

Enter Silvano.

Silvano, when and why did you decide to become a professional volleyball coach?

I was born a coach. Years after I started, I began to examine my own path. So I figured out that I was born with this predisposition or with this passion.

I started playing volleyball, when I was 14 years old. When I was 16 years old, I liked to go and watch the practices of those who were a year or two years younger than me.

I would go to watch their practice and the coaches would tell me: Do a bit of setting with that guy or hit some balls on this other guy. And I liked that stuff.

Other situations gave away my affinity to coaching. In high school I figured out that one guy could become a decent player. He attacked well, he was tall. He had some good physical qualities. So I told him, come and play with me on my team.

At a certain point I studied to become a chemist. I was specialising in industrial chemistry. However when I became 19 years old, I chose to go to the university and study exercise science at the Institute of Physical Education.

Why? Because it was the school where they teached how to be a better coach.

When I went to do my military service, because when I did it, it was mandatory in Italy. I chose to go to the military school.

Why? Because they were teaching how to manage people. I was interested in understanding how from a military point of view people were managed.

And it was an experience that in my opinion fit in well with the life that I had created for myself. I was a setter, all these things helped me out.

Then, at the age of 25, when my club went to A1, the best Italian league, they got a great setter, a strong Bulgarian player.

I instead of going to play in a smaller team in my city or my region, I preferred to quit playing and start coaching young kids. Because I liked that much more than going to play in other teams for no or little money.

Slowly all these things developed.

So I simply followed what was my passion.

An important moment took place when I became 28 years old and my club asked me to be the first team coach. And that was the first team I coached in the so called Serie A. That's what became the Serie A1, back then it was called Serie A and Serie B.

And another important moment was 12 years later when I decided to become a professional because up to that point I divided my time between, teaching and coaching on the side.

I was a teacher because I had become a teacher in physical education. I taught physical education at school. All this took place in my city which was in Turin.

And I could do these 2 things at the same time, go to school in the morning and in the afternoon I was a coach.

So at that point I had to choose whether to continue my teaching profession or leave school and go to another city where I had an offer to coach full time.

And I chose the second thing. I chose to leave school, I was a teacher employed by the Italian state. But I resigned.

I was the first Italian coach who made that choice. That was in 1988.

I made the choice to devote myself full time to volleyball with every possible risk connected to that choice. At that time there were no professional coaches. At least in Italy there were no Italian professionals. There were some foreigners who did that and who then went back to their own country.

I made that choice, because I followed my passion.

And so from that moment on I became a complete professional. Which has certainly helped me to be more present in many things and choices from that point on.

You coached the Italian national team and years later the Bulgarian national team, all while combining it with club volleyball. Nowadays some federations want year round availability and don't want that these coaches train club teams in winter...

Never have I ever only coached a national team. I'm convinced that the one job helps the other. One thing helps the other.

If you stay 9 months without doing anything and then you get 3 months where you have to give it your all, but you lack being a trainer, you lack the habit. You lack the habit of the work. That's not okay.

The sports federations that do not want coaches to also coach club teams, in my opinion have it wrong. That is my idea at least.

If anyone has a small disadvantage it is the club, because the club gets the coach back when the European Championship is over or when the World Championship is over. The Olympics in general are done pretty early, so there's no problem there.

The World and European championships are usually in September. So the coach only joins his club team a week before the start of the club competition. So there you have to be well organised. You have to have a staff that knows you well and who can carry the season's preparation during those first one and a half months. According to your ideas of course.

But the club also receives subsequent benefits because a coach who has done international competitions is more sure of him/herself.

They had experiences that the others on a beach by the sea can't have. 🙂

They coached the VNL, the European championships, they maintained their connection with the world of volleyball, they increased their knowledge. They know all of the players, in case that they need to contact a certain player.

What the club initially loses, they'll earn back later on.

So in my opinion it is an advantage for everyone. The federation gets the biggest advantage, their coach is a 'well trained' coach who went all winter without going to play tennis and without doing things that don't have anything to do with our game.

Even if these coaches go and watch a game, that's more of a passive job. Because when I go to watch a game, there are always 20 people who want to talk to me. So I don't see anything anyways.🙂

If you would be able to give one advice to your younger self or to any young coach out there, what would it be?

The advice that I always give everyone, not just referred to volleyball, it's a general advice...

When you need to make an important choice in your life, you must follow your own gut feeling.

You should not seek and follow the advice of others, not even from your parents.

If I had followed the advice of my parents I would not have become a coach because my parents and my dad in particular, had sent me to that school for chemists because he wanted me to become a chemical engineer or a doctor in chemistry.

And when I said I'm going to be a teacher, he was offended and for a long time he didn't speak to me. It was a terrible thing for him, but my good fortune was that I hung in there.

I told myself that his is the right education to pursue.

Because if I am wrong, I am wrong and I will work hard to find an alternative way. But if I make a mistake because I followed someone else's advice, I will always have the idea that they were to blame.

I wouldn't try to figure it out and look for my own alternate solutions, because I would be thinking that it is all their fault, right.

We all have to follow our passions, our own preferences, that what we enjoy doing.

Whatever it is, if we have pleasure doing it, it will definitely be a success.

Hindsight is of course always 20/20. But life doesn't work like that.

Which goals do you have? What is it that drives you?

My goal. There is always this one objective. To always win.

Saying it like that it's simple, trivial even. Your goal is to win when you're
in pro sports, that's clear.

I know that to win you have to walk a certain path. The path is always that of improving myself, I must always grow.

And even now that I am almost 75 years old, I have to keep growing if I want to keep doing what I do. Because if I don't do it well, it doesn't give me satisfaction and if it doesn't give me satisfaction it's useless to even do it. So I have to keep improving.

I have to keep on studying, studying the players, studying the opponents.

A month ago I was the instructor at the 3rd degree course (the last course before getting your coaches diploma) of the Italian Volleyball Federation.

We spent 10 days in Cavalese, 10 days in the national training center, up in the mountains near Trento. We had 40 students taking that last course. And it was one of the most beautiful things to me.

I like it because when you already have these great students, well with them it's not that you tell them stuff and they write it down, no, you can discuss with them. You start off by setting up an argument, but then you discuss with them.

I always return home with many concepts that I have to study. And this is me continuing to follow a path of growth.

Fortunately, there are several coaches, usually Italians, who write me, through email or Whatsapp and they will send me their ideas.

You also saw that I participated in a few webinars? (- Yes) I participate in almost all of them and now they involve me even more often and make me do these kind of 'interventions'.

It's always very interesting and it helps me to reason and think about all these things.

I have a concept inside my head that older coaches are more creative then young coaches. This is an idea that goes against all ways of thinking.

Everyone thinks that an old person has these 'old' concepts, he has the so called ideas from when they were young. And instead a young person is very creative because he or she has and follows all these new concepts. That to me, is a so called commonplace, a cliché.

I hate clichés, the concept of thinking that everyone thinks in the same way. Everyone must have a thought that is real, adherent.

Let me explain why I'm saying this:

When I was young I was very insecure. So when I went to listen to an already older or more experienced coach. I would write down everything they did and afterwards I did exactly that. Many times without knowing why I was doing it, but because he said it, because that coach did it.

That isn't 'having new ideas'. That's just being insecure as most young people are. They will slowly become more confident people.

A coach who is already 'ahead in his years' has an entire career behind him. From which he takes all the information, he keeps it inside his head and can mix them together to make a 'new product'.

I now know very well what the boundaries are wherein I can make my mistakes. So I know that I can't make huge mistakes. I know that, because I have experienced it all before.

I know what the boundaries are of my 'new experiments'. And I am not afraid to try new things because I feel very confident.

Over the years I'm now able to do things, which are experiments, because I also know how to turn them back if it doesn't work out. So I am much more confident and much more creative.

And that's what helps me to say what I told you.

That in my opinion older coaches are much more creative...of course they can't have closed minds, they must continue to want to improve, otherwise all this for sure makes no sense.🙂

If they keep wanting to improve and have understood this than an experienced coach is much but much better than a younger coach.

All of this not to simply defend 'my category', but because it is reality.

How do you go about creating your team? What are factors that contribute to the success of your team?

The biggest task is always: How do you compose your team.

In this period(recorded at the start of summer), but in France even already from January onwards, is when we start to compose the team for the next season.

Already in creating this group of players, we do 70%, maybe even 80% of the work where our 'final ranking' will depend upon.

And so that is the most important moment, the time when we are able to choose our players. When we sign them for our team. Therefore, our job basically never finishes.

Because one aspect of my job is to continually get to know players, not those who play on my team, but those who play on the other teams. Following talent, the national teams and get all of that information. Looking at a player from a 360-degree standpoint.

What I look at is the technical information which is basically the most important input, how a player handles the fundamentals, how he serves, how he attacks and how he receives, etc. And then I want to have more information. What kind of player is he? What kind of guy is he, how adaptable is he, how is his behaviour etc.

Without making it all too complicated or too difficult.

Some of the strongest players that I have coached in my career were also the most difficult characters to handle. But with having my teacher's background, I believe that I also have the skills to handle the so-called 'difficult' players.

And most of the time they are the ones who then give me back the most satisfaction when it's time to play the game.

I am not interested in having a group of polite guys, a group of friends, all of them doing the right things and never making mistakes. I care about seeing them play great volleyball.

So all that helps me not to be too complex in my decision making.

I'll get a pretty good understanding of a player and sometimes sign players that other teams have sent away because they are difficult to be managed.

The championship title that we won in France, our main protagonist was Stephen Boyer, who is a player that Ajaccio had sent away, which another team had sent away because he was 'complicated'.

He's a world class player however. He had a background that was different from the others and that's okay, we need to have the peace of mind to understand these things and help the player to fully understand their goals.

So right now, we have to build the team.

This is the most important moment.

I must also tell you that I have some ideas that are my own. In the sense that, for example a player like you, a taller middle blocker I'm not looking for these players. I am looking for middles that are 'smaller-sized'. I don't need tall players in my league.

M: Examples of the 'smaller' middles that played for Silvano in Chaumont -> Plak, Averill, McDonnell, Stahl. Middles around 2 meters, 6ft5 tall. Also dug up the contract proposals that Cuneo and Silvano made me around 2006 to let this one pass, hehe. 😇.

But I still consider the middle to be the most important player on the team. In my way of understanding volleyball the middle is the most important player on the team.

Firstly, I can't stand that they aren't considered great servers, 'Middles need to serve without mistakes and easy, they can do an easy float...'

But who said that?

They have something debilitating that they can't serve like other players? So for me middles must be able to serve as difficult as everyone else.

Secondly, the middles have a very difficult task. To execute the most complicated attack of all.

Because an outside hitter spiking from position 4 always attacks in that zone and they expect the ball in that zone. Then sometimes he attacks the pipe. An opposite always spikes from the back.

But a middle according to where the reception goes, which can go towards every position alongside or close or far from the net, more to the right, more to the left, the middle has to find the right coordination together with the setter to go and attack that difficult ball.

Middles are the most in difficulty of them all in attack and they have to have better coordination and physical skills than anyone else.

That's why, for example, I take Fabian Plak at Chaumont, but Fabian Plak has already been in 7 or 8 teams before and he is just 24 years old, but I like that kind of player.

Being able to construct a team with these specific characteristics is important to me, right now.

And so once you have the roster ready you have to have a system of play. Because today, especially in volleyball, you don't often see players remain a long time in the same team, with the same coach.

Both because coaches change, but mostly because players change. Players stay 1 year maximum 2 in the same team, then change.

So it's important to have a clear game system. And from the first day on, the players must know what our game system is.

This is our receiving and spiking phase, clear? Clear! This is our serve, block and defensive phase, clear? Clear!

And afterwards it's my job to understand their individual habits, which depend many times on what's going on in the player's head and adapt that player to my system, while retaining the characteristics that that specific player has.

So a coach must have a good system, a universal system that they can use against any opponent. And the coaches needs to have the ability to implement it, to have it applied well.

And then, as the days go by, the practices are running, the staff and I need to get to know our players very well. We need to know what they have going on inside their heads. What is their level of acceptance of what we're doing.

What are the problems that they have, especially referred to volleyball. If someone has a problem outside of volleyball, that's okay, for that I also need the help from my assistants. My assistants must go out and eat together with the players, sometimes go out and have a beer or a coffee with them, etc. In that way then they can talk and connect to them.

I would struggle and I can't...it's not even a goal of mine to go to deep into communicating with my players. But I have to know everything, my assistants tell me what the problems are and I have to think about how from a psychological point of view, I can help the player.

However, it is the staff that has to help me to direct all this.

That's why I had told you earlier that it is important to me to have a high quality staff. Each one of them must be a leader in their own field .

But at the same time, be ready to dialogue with the players and to really 'live' the experience they are exposed to.

Over the years you have coached players from nearly every volleyball federation or country out there. How important is your knowledge about their background in your process to make them a better athlete?

When I coach 'important' players, I have to know well what the characteristics of volleyball are in their home country. I'll make an example.

An important example was when I coached Ferrara 20 years ago. I took two Brazilian players, in 2001 I signed Gilberto Amaury Godoy Filho, 'Giba' for short and Gustavo Endres.

These 2 players had it clear in their minds that they wanted to grow. Gustavo was the last player who was part of the Brazilian national team to come to play in Italy. And so he wanted to learn many things from the Italian league.

So if I have to help Giba and Gustavo to grow. I need to know how they train in Brazil. Not understanding the 'Brazilian volleyball style', because everyone plays volleyball in the same way. There may be differences in the individual characteristics, the physical and mental aspects of the player.

Every athlete is unique and different. But there isn't a difference between the volleyball that is played in Belgium or Italy or Russia.

There is just one kind of volleyball.

However, I need to know how Bernardinho coached these players. I have to help Giba, if I have to especially help Gustavo...because Gustavo came to me and told me, Silvano, I have to become the best middle in the world, you have to help me become the best middle in the world. So I need to know how they were trained before.

With Gustavo we found a couple of key points to focus on. Simple ones.

One was his blocking moves, but he himself already had the concept clear that 'if I move and arrive straight with straight hands over the net, I become a good middle.'

On the other hand, if I am a little bit slower, and have to move my hands towards position 2 or 4, I won't be a good middle blocker. The same thing goes for his lateral blocking moves.

And then I taught him that you have to be strong in attack as a middle, because he had the idea that a middle only needs to be good at blocking. That's not true at all.

Above all, a middle must be a strong spiker and in fact I look for players who are good at serving and good at spiking in particular.

Because serving and spiking are the 2 most important fundamentals.

We talked a lot about his spiking. And he became a decent, not great but a decent spiker.

This is something that you remember, right? You played together with him or on opposing teams?

M: Yep, he played at Treviso in that period.

Right, he came to Ferrara and then went, if I remember correctly, he went to another team and afterwards he played for Treviso.

So the knowledge of their background is important. As with everything, 'knowledge' needs to be the starting principle.

I can help players if I know their history. This makes me able to help them to achieve different goals, but also simple objectives.

For every middle for example, we'll prepare a montage about their approach. The approach is the foundation upon which your spiking is built. They have to see what they are doing and what the best in the world do or at least how I believe that it should be done.

How will our game look like in the future? Or what is needed to improve our game?

The first thing I want to say, which is an important thing to realise for every coach out there.

I don't know whether in the future we will attack with our elbows. Or we'll need to block with the back of our hands. These things I don't know. If we'll continue to spike, to attack, to defend, how we defend today...we don't know that, that all depends on the rule changes that will happen. Certain techniques or certain tactics change according to new regulations.

But there is one thing that we coaches need to do better today and in the future even more. That is the quality control of the work that we do every day in our gym.

I, like many others, record every practice session and my staff and myself review the practices every single day.

And so many times I tell myself: 'I've coached badly'. I did something wrong.

The basic law of sports is that progress happens through repetition. We will repeat our gestures, with the goal of automating these gestures.

We'll make many serving repetitions, many attack movements, with the goal of making that gesture become an automatic movement.

What does automatic mean? It means that we do it without thinking about it. So the basic law of sports is repetition to create automatisms.

But beware. I can create correct and positive automatisms. Because, I'll repeat the right gesture. But if I don't stay focused. I can also repeat wrong gestures.

A very common situation happens in defense. A ball falls down 2 meters from where I'm standing, I watch it with my eyes and I do not move. I am making a wrong gesture because the right gesture would be to take a step or take a dive and
still try to catch the ball. This is the right gesture. If I stand still and watch the ball, I am making a wrong gesture because with their eyes no one defends.😎

If I during practice am not catching these balls, but I'm watching them, I don't make a block movement, I read what happens and I stop and don't make a move... well I am making a wrong gesture.

So I have to be careful. If I'll repeat this wrong gestures many times, I am
automating a wrong gesture. So I am automating the error.

It would be much better if I went to the bar to drink a beer rather than automating a wrong gesture. And once they are automated, I'll also make these errors in the game.

Therefore the most important thing for us as coaches is controlling the quality of the gestures which each player makes in practice.

And you can be as attentive as you can be in practice, but volleyball goes too fast to see all the things in real time. We need to record the exercises we do and review them 5, 10, 20 times. Review every action.

And this is the future of every sport, not just volleyball. It is the future of sports. The ability to control every gesture to make sure they're correct. This being said, thinking about what volleyball will be in the future is very complicated.

Another thing of which I'm sure is that the individual fundamental with the most room for progress is the serve.

All the other fundamentals: blocking, defense, spiking are already at a high level. The overall handling of these will improve, the quality will improve because
the quality of the athletes will improve.

But the serve, which is already so important in today's volleyball, has very clear margins of progress left.

I am pursuing studies about serving and I am fortunate to have a few coaches who are studying the speed of the current serves, the trajectories of serves, etc.

All of us coaches today are already satisfied to make a player serve to position 5 and to ask a player to serve to position 1. So we ask the player to hit in a zone which covers 3 meters of the court.

But there is a statistic that tells us that when the ball goes into the areas of conflict it greatly increases the probability of doing some serious damage; aces or points. This happens when the ball goes between the player and the sideline when the ball gets served between 2 players.

Especially when it's a short serve, the short serve is one of the least used but most effective weapons there are in volleyball.

So I just gave some examples. The serve is the fundamental where we coaches are not demanding a lot, while we have to greatly improve the quality of our demands and the 'how we train'.

And the players have to believe way more that they are able to improve their serve.

Because of all this I'll make this prediction. In the future, not that long from now, the so called 'side-out', the attack and receiving phase will increasingly become a high ball situation. The middles will get even less involved in the attack after receiving the serve.

So we have to prepare ourselves for many high situations. Both for those who have to set and all the other players must also be able to set these higher sets. Being able to set a high ball which is actually a ball that can be spiked will be very important, otherwise you'll lose the point right away.

We will have to be able to handle a bad reception, make a great high set and transform that in some cases into a winning ball, but most of the time in a ball that we play against the block to cover and replay.

So at that point the middles will become important again, because in that second rally, in the second attack phase the middles needs to enter inside the action.

And that what our great setters aren't able to do in the first action, you know, these creative setters that push the ball everywhere and seem to reinvent the game. No one reinvents the game, but you know what I mean. 🙂

They will be able to show their creativity not on the first possibility but during the second rally.

Do we need a rule in place to handle serve errors? Or how do you look at that?

Years ago, like many coaches, I had the rule that a server couldn't go over 20% of errors over the total of his serves.

Today, I have to tell you that I love players who have 50% of mistakes. But not because I like to see mistakes.

But because those who make 50% of mistakes, are often the ones who are making points from the serve line.

Let me give you an example, last year my opposite was a Cuban player, and in an important game he served 19 times, in 4 sets, he made 13 errors and 6 aces.

Which means that the opposing team did not have the pleasure to receive one single serve. He only made aces and errors on these 19 serves.

With 6 aces, I am able to win games.

If my player in 3 sets is serving 8 serves, without a single mistake, but he never served 2 consecutive serves that player didn't make a single point, we didn't make a single point.

By far I prefer the player that makes 70% mistakes, but also makes me points. This can be 'beautiful' or not...

But the goal is to win. It is important to win games.

Today, it is important to win games.

I have this issue of not being interested in games til the score gets around 15 - 15 and onwards. Do you have an opinion about the current points system?

I don't know what to tell you.

Even a score of 0 - 0 is important to me. It's important to know who'll make that first point.

In fact I'm scouting every single 'first point' of the set. We are making a scouting report how each team plays in that situation. It teaches me something.

Your message about the game and it's rules is very clear. A coaches' job is to play with the rules they are given.

You have to be ready for any adaptation. When there will be an evolution, we are ready.

Like we said before, so many techniques have changed solely because the rules of the game have changed.

The attack behind the 3 meter line became important when they changed the rules.

This was an important moment in volleyball. Early 1980s. When the rule became that we can attack from the 3 meter line while landing in front of said 3 meter line.

Before that moment, the rule was that you had to land behind or outside the 3 meter zone. So you were at least jumping 1,5 meter further behind than we are now.

I won 2 championships in Italy with a 6-2 line up. Later on, with that rule change, the spike from the second line became an effective attack, exactly as effective as that of the first line.

So right there the system with just a single setter was born.

The year 1970 is still very clear to me. A team won the World Championship in 1970 and the European Championship 1971. They were called DDR, the team of Eastern Germany.

And Eastern Germany they had a simple game because they wouldn't attack a high ball, but a very high ball and they would spike against the hands of the block, because at that time in block you couldn't cross the net with your arms. Until then the rule was that the blocking hands had to be vertical. If they went over the net it was an invasion foul.

Imagine how easy spiking a block-out was for them.

Many rules have changed. You could go over the entire history of the changing of rules.

There was a rule in volleyball a few years ago that, you could touch the net while blocking without it being a foul. They changed it back and I never understood why they did that. I liked it. Because the involuntary touch of the net, when a player puts up their hands to block and touches the net, it gives no advantage to those who touch the net.

And it gives an extra weapon in the hands of the refs to whistle and continue to whistle.

Many times players touch the net and no one notices. Sometimes a coach could see it and now we have the video check that handles it. So many times we'll be touching the net. But it is not fair that sometimes it is seen and sometimes it is not seen.

This is a rule that I don't like. I would want to put that rule back.

What was the best game you've ever seen. What recent or game from the volleyball vaults did validate once more that volleyball is the greatest sport on the globe?

It's not just a single game, but it's a entire competition, of which the final
game was the epilogue.

The final was the most beautiful thing, but it was the result of the tournament.

We'll go back to 1976. I'm talking about Poland winning the Olympics in Montreal, Canada.

That Polish team had won the World Cup in 1974 and the 1976 Olympics. That team, coached by Hubert Wagner...in Poland they play a Wagner trophy named after this coach who has deceased.

Well, it was a team which was never the favorite to win. Their road up to the final was made up of only 3 - 2 wins. In the tournament they won 7 consecutive games, all of them a 3 - 2 match.

Poland played the semifinals Saturday evening, at 10 p.m. against Japan, a 3 - 2, a tiresome game, which finished at 1 a.m. during the night.

While Russia, back then it was called the Soviet Union, had played the semifinal against Cuba 3-0. That game was finished at 5 in the afternoon. Easy game, they started to recuperate early.

The day after nobody even considered Poland to be able to play a decent game. Poland, by the way, played with the same starting 6 throughout the entire Olympics.

The final starts. Russia dominates the first set. Loses the second, wins the third. We think it's over. But Poland plays a splendid game, just like they did throughout the entire Olympics. Defending, defending, fighting, fighting.

Which is still somewhat of a characteristic of Poland today. Still today we think that the Polish players are very resilient. They cover, defend, cover, defend and play on.

In those years, that team, was amazing. I was at Montreal and saw Poland win 3 - 2, beat the Soviet Union with which was a very long game, over 3 hours long.

My memory of that Olympics, that Poland and that final will always stay with me.

There was a moment in the game where Russia was winning 2 - 1 and in the 4th set they had a match ball while attacking. They received a free ball which Zaytsev, the setter of that team, the father of Ivan, sets to position 4, a perfect set for the outside hitter and the incoming Polish middle manages to touch the ball from under the net, they take it back, counterattack it and are able to win 3 - 2 afterwards. What a fantastic game.

Other than that I don't have more recent games that I remember with the same pleasure.

I remember many, also those that I've won. But like this one, there isn't another.

You also have to realise that Poland went and played the entire Olympics without talking to their coach, because Hubert Wagner was so tough, so tough during practice, so tough that the players didn't speak anymore to their coach.

Every timeout, I was there, he would call the timeout and then step aside, the players talked a bit to each other, then they would go on the court again. They won the Olympics like that.

This happens sometimes to us coaches. 🙂

Doug Beal won the '84 Olympics in Los Angeles. And then he left the national team
because the players didn't want him anymore.

I coached many of those players. And afterwards, 'afterwards' those players would say. 'However Doug Beal was a great coach'.

Because for the players the best coach is always the one from the previous year.🙂

If you can make the strongest 'starting six' in the world, right now. What would your team look like?

I created my ideal starting 6 from today, following my own ideas.

For me, the best setter is Giannelli.

For me setters don't have to be phenomenal setters, but they have to be players who help the team to score points.

Giannelli and setters like Giannelli, I like those a lot. I find Giannelli the ideal compromise between a good setter, but a player that serves and blocks well, who defends well, etc. etc. Who is a leader on the court.

Then the best opposite right now is the Russian opposite Mikhaylov. Because he is a great fighter, a player who has a lot of mental strength as well as good fundamentals. A complete player.

The middles that I like the most. One will surprise you, because I like the American Smith a lot. Who's playing at Zaksa in Poland. He is a player who has not made a 'great career', yes, he's part of the U.S. national team, but you know what I mean, he's not a 'famous' middle.

But according to my ideas, he's a great player, strong attacker. He's one of my examples when I show other middles the ideal movements of a middle, the first I show is always Smith.

Then I really like Lisinac, the Serbian. Also a great server and spiker.

I have to tell you...Simon can also come along and play with us. 🙂 I nominated Smith and Lisinac, but also Simon is a player who makes the difference.

Afterwards, my outside hitters. I like Matey Kaziyski a lot, he's a player I coached 10 years ago with the Bulgarian national team. And still today he is a player who, despite his advanced age, because he is 38 years old, still has great physical qualities, but more importantly, technically he's great. And it's a great guy.

I really like this young Polish player Semeniuk. So I put him together with Kaziyski as my 2 outside hitters.

The libero that I like the most is the French player, Grebennikov. Also he is very well known.

If you could have a gigantic billboard anywhere with anything on it — metaphorically speaking, getting a message out to every athlete on the globe — what would it say and why?

In 1976 I was appointed to be the head coach of a Serie A team.

Inside of my head a lot of problems and doubt started to play up...about my own capabilities.

I was just 28 years old, a very young coach. So I started to think, I not only have to manage the players, but also the audience, but also journalists and the club management. How will I do all that?

Reading a book that I had found, one sentence, one quote got to me.

I wrote it down and over the last 46 years, that quote is still a point of reference to me, it helped me out so much.

The quote goes like this:

'If you walk down a road and you stop to throw rocks at every barking dog you come across, you will never reach your destination.'

Your destination being your objective. This person says this thing or the other one thinks that way about you, another one is criticising you.

All of them are barking dogs, let them bark because I have to follow my own path and I have to get to my goal. If I stop walking, talk to them, wanting to defend myself or throw rocks at them, they will just get more angry.

Just like a dog would be if you would throw rocks at them.

Instead, tell them nothing. Give them a smile, greet them and leave. And little by little, they'll keep quiet. For me, it is the philosophy that has helped me the most over the years.

Once I heard an American actor say, who in my eyes is a philosopher, Clint Eastwood, that he responded to a person. To a person who was very opinionated towards him.

And he said to him.

'You know, opinions are like...' and I'll say a bad word in Italian, you understand me. 'Opinions are like 'balls/testicles', everyone has their own.'

In the Italian language 'i coglioni' is also a way of identifying people(as assholes). It is not only an anatomical part of our body, it is also a way to identify everyone who wants to give us their opinions.

People criticise us, they want to have something to say. Okay, all those are just opinions. They are opinions. And everyone has their own.

But I have my own and they are the most important ones.

How has a failure, or apparent failure, set you up for later success? Do you have a “favorite failure” of yours?

That's not an easy question for me.

I thought about it because, you know, the defeats are all failures, every single one of them. Including those defeats that maybe seem less important.

However, they are all small failures. All these failures, though they teach you something.

I nearly arrived at 1800 official games. Official ones, not friendlies. There is a journalist who did some calculations, I am probably now at 65-70% wins, so the rest are defeats. So there are many, many defeats.

They are all failures, but they all teach you something. Of course, you have to be able to analyse them.

So about these defeats because I'm talking to coaches here...

I feel like giving this advice; to be prudent and to always examine defeats from a technical point of view.

Us coaches, should never run into or fall into the trap of thinking about defeats like the president of the club does. Or like the sports director. Like the head of the supporters, like the journalist.

Because they will always think that we lost because that player went for a beer last night. That other player went out with that girl to the disco. Or because our players do not train enough or because we are not focused.

Looking for or making up all these excuses, which even sometimes we as coaches will find, because we don't have the ability to understand that we lose because we made a few more technical mistakes compared to our opponents.

When they ask me: 'Why have you lost?' I'll never be able to say why we have lost.

When a coach says, we lost because we missed too many serves, he's saying something irrelevant. It may be one of many reasons. But if we say that we lost because we received badly, even that is nonsense, because the difference between us and them can be a few percentage points of perfect or less than perfect receptions.

But it's not that what makes us win or lose, sometimes receiving not perfectly some teams will spike even better.  Or this one: "We don't defend any balls" "We don't defend anything."

Coaches should never analyse matches and defeats in that way. This can be done by the club presidents. The fans can do that. We lost because we made a wrong substitution. Because we did not ask for a time out at the right time. All this is nonsense, they are all part of a story.

We have to know how to analyse the matches. And we have to analyse them, whether we win or lose. We need to analyse the mistakes that we made. Whether you win or lose.

Because we should not be influenced by the outcome to evaluate the road we need to take to improve in practice.

We have to improve even if we won. Not, we won so we are perfect. We lost so we are not able to play volleyball. That is a mentality that coaches should not have.

They must create the mindset of being a critic whether they win or lose.

So our real failures happen when we are unable to handle the most difficult moments. When we are not capable to manage our team's most difficult moments.

You had a question that you didn't ask yet, but it's an interesting one. About my book recommendations.

M: It's coming up.

Ok, so I'll give my answer now already.

There is a book, a book that can be read in 1 hour. That's written by (Ken) Blanchard. Who is an American business man. He had a successful business. And he wrote a book in response to the many questions that he had received. How come that your company is doing so well? How come it's so successful?

The book is called 'One Minute Manager'. You've probably read it?

M: Not read, I know of it, yes.

Okay, this for me is the best book referring to our coaching job.

Blanchard says: "When I get these employees that are early in their careers, they are very insecure. If they do 10 things. They make a mistake on 9 of them and only get 1 right. I call them to me and tell them, great job, because you did that thing in a great way. I won't talk about the 9 things that they did wrong, that were clear errors."

And that's the same thing for us, with our players. We do not have to put the emphasis on the mistakes and only on their mistakes.

But we need to talk about the things that they are doing well. As the players become more secure in themselves, more confident in themselves, we can also talk about the things which obviously aren't going great.

But I still have to be careful that when I do a video meeting with my players and show them, look here you made a mistake that afterwards I show him what he did well and tell him 'bravo', because it is very important this way of enhancing the personality of our players.

So look, my failures happen when I'm unable to be a (great) coach. When I'm not able to do these things well, but I let myself get caught up due to impulse and nervousness and when my head doesn't function as perfectly as I know it must function.

In the last five years, what new belief or behaviour did you change and why?

I think the further I go and the older I get. Or if you will...I don't use the word 'aging', this is objective data, in reality I feel that I improve in my experience. I grow as an experienced person.

In the things I set out to myself to do, the things that I want to do, I'm increasingly more open to other people's input. This didn't happen over the last 5 years, but grew over the last 2 decades, as I grew older, I certainly became more predisposed to listen to what other people tell me.

In the early part of my sports life I was a little more closed off about the things I was certain of, subsequently now I am much less, much less certain of what I was convinced of before.

Even though I know very well that what I present or communicate to my players or to the people who listen to me I'm 100% certain of.

Many eloquently say that they only 'transfer their doubts'.

No, I transfer to you my certainties and I'll explain why they in this moment, are my certainties. I'll explain the path that I took.

But I know very well that 5 years from now that about some of my current ideas I will no longer be so sure and I will have others or some of them will have changed.

Of this I am certain, because in my life I many times changed my ideas, in the sense that I have been able to evolve my own convictions.

I reflect a lot, I think a lot. I confront myself a lot with others coaches. By doing these continuous webinars for example and there is also a bar here near my home where I meet with other coaches.

There is a coach who lives in my city, whose name is Roberto Serniotti and we meet each other from time to time. We'll take a coffee together, our coffee always lasts 3 hours minimum.🙂 We need to confront each other about our ideas.

I like Roberto a lot he was my collaborator for many years. First in Turin, afterwards in Cuneo. He thinks a lot and reflects a lot. He never says a word at random.

I'm much more open than before and the further I go, the more available I am towards input from others, even if I won't ever accept an opinion of somebody else and treat it as a fact, as my own.

No, it is all a contribution to my book of volleyball. Every chapter is in there, so if I get input about the libero position I'll expand the book.

These days I have been discussing with some coaches about the exact position of the libero on the court. If it is better that the libero defends on position 5 or on position 6. But also about the fact that there are some coaches who use a libero for receiving and another one for defense, they play with a 'double' libero.

I always consider a libero like the 'first' libero and till he's able to stand upright, he'll be on the court.

But there was a coach, who gave me this simple answer. I asked why do you use a 'double' libero? And he answered me: Because at the end of the game I have two happy players. Just that. Nothing else. Nothing else. Instead of having one player who's not very happy, one who never plays, who will get demotivated. He said: I have two happy players.

And this is a phrase that is in my head now. It does not mean that I will ever use the 'double' libero. But it's put in my head...and it has to mature into something. Afterwards we will see.

The last few years of my life, in my sports career, have brought me a little closer...to this kind of bigger or larger openness to ideas.

How do you handle the pressure of your job, did a stressful situation ever let you second guess your coaching career?

I never gave myself that answer. Because I never find myself under stress.

And this may sound presumptuous to you, but it is the result of the following reasoning. My trade, let's call it a trade, let's call it work. For me it's a hobby, not a job, let's call it my activity. It is an activity that I enjoy.

It is an activity that has given me confidence and security.

And it is a difficult activity, it is difficult to not make any mistakes.

So I make a lot of mistakes but I never am under 'pure' stress. I do have difficult moments that are almost always related to the current team results.

I will also have had moments where I was disappointed, maybe there was a player, which I thought would give me a better answer, instead he disappointed me.

All these things happen, but this is never stressful to me, because I have confidence in myself. I have always confronted myself with other coaches. I always talked to all the coaches around the world. So I talked with Doug Beal, with Platonov, I talked to Bernardinho or Renan Dal Zotto. And all of the coaches before them. I talk with all of them. And everyone has their own problems.

So I know these problems. Almost always I recognise these same problems. So I know how to react.

First, I'll wait. I don't have to give immediate answers. I'lI take my time. However, I never had that much stress that I told myself, enough, I don't coach anymore.

Absolutely not. If I get into trouble, it's the exact same as all the others get into trouble. So I have to let it pass.

It's like when you are in the desert and the wind flares up, you just put the blanket over your head. Wait a moment for the wind to pass. Because by just using your hands you cannot stop the sand and the wind.

You have to wait for it to pass. Take the time needed. Things mature, the mind becomes cooler.

And you always find a solution. A solution is always found.

A solution is also saying that I was wrong. Many times I had to admit and say that I was wrong. I don't consider saying that I was wrong as an act of cowardice, in the sense that I would appear weak. No.

Many times I've been wrong. Everyone makes mistakes. And I'm one of those people.

So I've never had this kind of stress to say I'll quit. That never happened.

Thank you, coach Prandi.



