See the beginning of the practice where the guys have some moment free because before this exercise, physical training organized for them, stretching, core stability, abdominal exercise for the shoulder, to put them in good condition for start of the practice. Nothing special, you can see there is only a few minutes, three minutes that they are free and you can see now my physical trainer that is start to give to the guys the tester for the jump because we give to every player the tester for the jump and we check in every practice how much number of jumps they are making. Especially in this moment was really interesting. Because we had this trainer that was in the process of make normal training but we was in control with the number of the jump. Because this trainer have in this moment one maximum number of jump over 40 centimeters. Means he don't make 200 jump but he need to make, I don't know, 80, 90, 100. I don't remember. I was acting in this moment. You know, the process was really clear. I also check for everyone how many jump they make because I don't want to make one practice with too many jump. You know, you have to control. When I am in the ending, every time I check with attention with the physical trainer and after that, you know, if is necessary, I can also stop the practice and make, for example, some reception, some sets. For someone, some individual work. But basically, we are with a lot of attention about this, especially if in the morning we make one important weight lifting session. You know, we can't work so hard every time. When you work, you have to, you know, to take care about the quality of the practice, about the quality of the physical work, about the quality of the mental work. And I'm lucky that I have in this team really players of a high level. Okay, I have a lot of world champions, but also players with great, really great mentality. By the way, this is the first part. You know, they are preparing and now I make for the beginning one baguerona. For sure, it's one game. I will go to the start of baguerona. I make baguerona because I don't want to make one-to-one for warming up. I like that the guys are touching the ball. They have one strategy. Basically, they make everything, but the setting is much more interesting than one-to-one. They start the first touch with the baguera and that's all, basically. I have a few ideas of baguerona, of course, but I don't make too much. I make two, three times a week. Not more. I don't make every day. Because some days I take it. I don't care about the second touch, about some exercise of techniques, because I need, of course. But you can see that they are jumping, they are preparing, and they are ready. And now you can see also some men that are playing strong. It's normal. It's life. It's good. I like it. I like it because they are enjoying, they are preparing, they are challenging. Because they are every time challenging. Because the first team won ten times. They have one pizza paid for the other side. They are complaining about the ball. It's in, it's out. It's nice. Right now, there is jumping, there is quality. They are preparing. And after that, you can also immediately start some exercise because it's not necessary to make something more. Another exercise that I make a lot of time for working about the second touch, for repetition. I like to work with exercises that they make alone. I don't want to put the ball for them. I want that the situation is similar to the game. Now that there is one ball, you have to make a setting. They are running. They are completing. And my team can improve a lot in the second touch from the other player, not from the second. Because this is the key point. It's really important. Every time with the guys, they said that when there is one difference, if you don't have a good setting, it's for nothing. And for this reason, you have to be really serious, thinking about it. And you see that they are working good, with good quality. They make, again, better warming up of the shoulder. Like this, you can, of course, prepare them. And at the same time, I make exercise randomly. We can say it's not a blockage idea. Of making a second touch. But it's random. Because there is one guy that makes a small difference. Nothing specific. But it's one thing that I like a lot. The second part that I like a lot is that all the guys are involved. It's not that there is someone that doesn't work. There are seven guys on one side. Six on one side in this moment. In this practice, I missed one player. It was with one injury to the knee. A small injury now is back. But, you know, like this, all the guys are involved. Because I don't like when there is someone that has the ball and doesn't touch the ball. What I need is to create a situation similar to the game. The tape that is on the floor. Is this the position where they should not defend inside? Or is it just like a visual help where they are on the court? Yeah, it's a visual. I call this part. Defense box. Because you have to stay out of the box. It's really interesting in my opinion. Because give the position of the defense in six. Or the movement of the guys. This is really simple to make. And helping when you put attention about the work of the defense. And in my opinion, it's really, really interesting. It's one idea of my friends. Alessandro Piroli. That is one guy that probably you know. He's one statistic. And now he's a coach. And every time he was involved with some new, some idea and so on. We started to use this box a lot of years ago. It's really, really helpful in my opinion for the defense. Because the guys. I don't want, for example, that the guys in six stay really inside. No? I don't want that they stay every time long. They were. Yeah. Running six for a huge responsibility about the ball. That touch the finger. And have to be going in this direction. I make every day. Also service. Basically in the beginning was one part. And maybe in the end another part of service. This is one exercise for warming up. Normally you can see that in one side. There is two guys. In six. Five. And the other side. There is one guy. Six. One. Means that the service in one side is in position five. And one side in position one. Basically. No. They are trying. They are serving. They are making warming up of the spike. Only one set there. And we try. And this is one exercise that I make with tempo. All the time. In the middle of the time that I use. Generally I change the receiver. I change the center. And so on. Is there also somebody that's doing the whistle? Yeah. Every time. Every time that there is service. I want the whistle. Yeah. Yeah. Because I think that is necessary to have the same feedback of the match for everyone. 