It's the same. I have to create the conditions for the guys for working, for improving, but not to make them tired. Because if I make them tired after, it's a problem, you understand? Because they lose quality. And for this reason, one side, I check the jump of the player. Second side, the rhythm of the practice. For example, this first part was not in great rhythm, only for a make analysis about what we have to do and so on. I don't remember now exactly in what moment of the week we are making this kind of exercise. Because in the first four weeks, basically, we were working three weeks. We were working a lot in a physical way because we have only one match a week. And now it's finished this time and we are playing every three days. And it's totally different also to practice because you can't make everything like you want. You know, the timing that the guys spend. You know, the arena has to be a good time, but not to be tired. In the past, probably, when there was Minds in the Vision, it wasn't like this because we were working a lot longer. But I remember that we were playing basically one time a week. No, it's for sure the same issue. Like you said before, most of these players are the most high-level players that are currently playing in the game. And yeah, they all play VNL. A lot of them play World Championship. Like you're starting six. Most all of them are playing. Except for the opposites, it's playing every competition that exists. So it's really difficult to balance all those things. Yeah, this is the problem. For example, also now, they have the guys on the national team. I am lucky because they have two guys of Italy. Flavio was with Brazil and he was playing all the VNL and all the World Championship. I have Semes, Amenyuk, also team, all VNL, all World Championship. You know, they play until the ending of the tournament. They have a lot of competition. Ole Gnotnicki, they have also the World Champions, but they don't play too much in the summer because they don't play VNL. They play only some flat qualification tournament, I don't remember. But by the way, you know, this is the problem. When we start to practice this season in England, we were in sixth person without setter because there is also Gregor Robert. They play VNL. You understand? And for me, what is the problem? It is clear that the tiredness can arrive soon, especially in the mental side. Because physically, you know, the guys, if you give a rest, two days of rest, one day of rest. For example, we play now, if you play too much in the role, but you give them one day and after you make all the fitness for the guys is okay. The most important is the mind. 