This is the side of 6-on-6 that they are working about block and defense. I keep focus in the other side, you know, the pusher. And in this side, of course, I turn all the players. When I make this exercise, I go on time because I want everyone to try in one side, everyone to try in the other side, you know. And we have more repetition. In this case, the reception you can see is perfect. And you have to try to touch the ball with the man in position too. And we make few repetitions. We change a little block. You see in the middle, in this moment, you know, one side, one in spike, one in block. We are moving all the players. Yeah, here we were really in the beginning of our job. And we are trying to keep focus. You see the position of the guys in defense that are out to the box defense. You know, they are trying to stay in position. I keep focus about this. I keep focus. I keep focus about the position in block, what they have to do. Yeah, we were talking a lot. The rhythm is not so high in this practice. I don't remember what they make at the bottom, of course. But the idea now is ball that go in position four now. Maybe too much for my assistant coach. But, you know, we make repetition like this. Perfect ball in three. And we go. Perfect ball in three. And we go. We are trying to work a lot about the block. We are good, but not enough. Good, in my opinion, with the level. You see now, we are making many. Yeah. This idea. Also, it's interesting to check about the cover of the spiker. Because it's really important. If you look at the position of the three by end defense on the other side, they are really with attention. They try to be every time in position, out to the box. This is one exercise. That I call Brazilian exercise. Because Brazilian. Because there is a lot of repetition. Generally, my practice is like this. That the first part is with the six on six analytics that we work about some system. In this case, I was working about block and defense. About our system. Nothing so special. But, you know, they are staying with attention in position, out to the box, in block. They try to be with attention also. You know. It's really important to give to them some idea how to play. But we make a lot of repetition. I can work in this part with the high ball, with the first tempo with ball, first tempo alone, only winger, and so on. We work about the slavativa. You have also to take care a lot about the situation of the ball as a slavativa, where the ball is on three meters and the ball is far from the net. Because, you know. A lot of situation in the modern volleyball is like this. That you have to manage the ball in attack with the setting far from the net. Because the reception is not so easy. The quality of the service is amazing. And for this reason, we have to organize a lot of situations with the slavativa, with high ball, and so on. This is the first part. It's always like this in general. And it's the time for thinking about position. About how to play. What we have to work, how we have to do, and so on. You see, when I hide ball now, great ball of Kamil Rikliski, you know, that cut the ball at position two, is working a lot. I'm working with them about the variations, spike a lot. I wasn't starting here, but now I'm trying to give them more and more information during this slide to make a repetition about the direction of the spike. Yeah. That was it. That was also one of my questions. I can imagine that you also have certain objectives with the individual players. For example, you just said with Kamil that he knows, okay, I talk with coach about this. And when I'm doing the exercise, I have to think about it. I guess they all have more or less like, like we saw before the left-handed shots. No, the situation is simple. We have priority or goal of the team, no, that in this case, I told you, we work about the defense, what is in this case is high ball. And if you repeat, if you see this section, we have to stay longer with the men in six, because the men in six want to stay longer and try to catch every ball that is possible. We have high ball, exclamativa, what we have to do, we don't have to fly with the wingery block. I always say that you have to use clean block, clean block means you have to cover if it's possible. Yeah. If you have one portion of court and that's all, and also we have individual, individual goal, no, and when I work about the individual goal, every time with them, I talk, no, now with Klukniski, I keep a lot of focus about the high ball between this one player that he jump a lot, but sometimes I make mistake about the timing of the jump is for this, that I repeat to him a lot of time, what you have to do, for example, the goal with the second libero. To, to stay in different, with feet apart, bend legs, hands down, some message, you know, key message for to try to help them to remember what they have to do in block, in defense, in spike, everyone have some goal. Of course, there is some player that are really good technically, they don't need too many information, but for example, if you try the way on, that is one player, amazing, is one of the best. So maybe the best player in the world, I don't know, I don't want to make any ranking, but he's one guys that, you know, he need help in some situation of the defense side, mean defense side, block and defense, because in spike, you know, sometimes it's not necessary to give in any information. There is some practice that are more intensive, of course, no, but basically in this kind of exercise, what I, I, need is to keep focus of all the tactical things of the team. 