===== SESSION: https://volleybrains.com/team-culture/ =====

----- VIDEOS -----
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VU8asOpGpUc
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ioMEbmSyFyA
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yfnsIE8Bu2k
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=b9HT1aXvvlE
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4fpKcGMsxz0
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hWiNx7xWkNg

----- TEXTO -----
47. Learning Path 2: Culture by design, not by default.

In our 'Learning Paths' we'll collect valuable concepts and insights which you can find on volleybrains.com. Each learning path will feature a specific subject related to the art of coaching.

⚡Culture by design!

Our video call with Alan Knipe planted the seed for this Learning Path.

Coach Knipe spoke at length about his efforts to shape and instill a culture of trust and accountability. About creating an environment in which his team could thrive.

But most importantly, to not allow circumstance to dictate your culture.

In today's Learning Path, we'll discuss various perspectives and motivations for designing your team's or club's culture.

🏐 Featured coaches.

Alan Knipe: Long Beach state head coach, former USA men's national team head coach

Hugh McCutcheon: University of Minnesota's head coach, former USA women's and men's head coach

Dan Friend: Lewis University's head coach

Terry Liskevych: former USA women's national team head coach, entrepreneur and driver behind the art of coaching volleyball.

Laurent Tillie: Panasonic Panthers head coach, former French national team head coach

⚡Let's dive in!

Alan Knipe

You touched upon the importance of team culture, let's talk a bit more about what you're instilling with your team, with your players.

We spend a tremendous time on our culture. The really enjoyable part of being a college coach in the men's game is that our season starts in January and you get your team in in August.

So you can spend that entire fall academic semester of building your team, both as athletes in the strength and conditioning and in the weight room.

And also in what we call our "retreat" that we have every Monday of the entire fall semester, where we're spending time on what we believe in.

And there's lots of levels to that.

Obviously we can talk about our blocking and our defense and all the technical parts of the game, but there's also things that are super important about our culture.

Because I'm a big believer, if you go back to what I said earlier about sustainable success, then you have to make sure that your culture is by design, not default.

The culture that I played in as a player here, albeit that it turned into a national championship and some very, very good teams, and I loved my time here, but it was very much by default at that time.

We had a very good collection of players, some very good coaches at the time. And then from year to year, it could change dramatically. So it was a little bit up and down, but the bad part about that is really quickly, if you're not careful, the culture by default can go bad in a heartbeat to.

The wrong coach, the wrong players, not enough attention to the behaviour within the locker room within the classroom, how they interact off the court with one another. There's lots of different things that can change it.

So you have to be able to address these early things that will come up, not if they come up.

Especially in this age of social media, where people can disappear from reality and just communicate with their thumbs all day. That becomes a little bit of a problem later on in life when they have to work within a unit with a team and they have to be able to communicate with the coaching staff...

So teaching them communication and teaching them how to be open and honest with their communication and direct with one another so that we can get buy-in.

If a team doesn't have good communication and they don't trust the fact that they can communicate with one another, they can communicate with their coaches...you're going to have players that are silenced and when they're silenced, there's not going to be buying into what you're trying to do.

And if you don't have buy-in, you're not going to get to the level of having any trust with one another. And obviously trust, as we all know, is an enormous part of team success.

Trusting to make the right play on the court, trusting that they'll make the right decision on Saturday night, trusting that they'll do what they're supposed to do academically to still be able to play.

Lots of trust is broken by the fact that communication hasn't been established as a foundation. And once you get the trust, and once you develop the trust with one another, you can now hold each other accountable.

Because you trust that the other teammate and the other coach or your head coach, or whoever it might be is totally invested into this culture and is communicating each step of the way and building trust each step of the way.

You're going to be more apt to trust that when he talks to you about accountability, like even volleyball related: 'Hey, that tip was yours. You have to get it.' Or I'm asking you to do this offensively or set this kind of offense as a setter.

You trust him more when you've had good open communication and lots of contacts.

And then now the accountability to holding yourself to the level of what the coach wants or what the players want, or your teammates want is easier for everybody because of that trust.

And once you have the communication and the trust and the accountability. Now we can start getting to the point of getting the results that we all wanted from the very beginning.

So we spent a lot of time talking about our culture being by design being intentional. And once again, going back to the idea of being able to write it down, we use kind of like, in a corporate world, a job description.

Everybody has a job description, but in a team, there is no such thing, even though we imply there is. So what we do a lot is we'll take our team and we'll divide it by position. And after we're deep into our retreat, we'll have the outside hitters get together and the opposites get together and everybody...the groups, get together and write their job description.

What does it means to be an outside hitter in our program? On blocking on defense, on our offense, serving whatever, all the different areas and what they're going to commit to doing. And they have to actually present that job description to the group as a group, they all get a piece of it and they all explain it to the group.

And what they're saying to the group is they're saying: "this is what we're going to do." So we're stating it, we're writing it down. And then we're asking you to hold us accountable to this. And it's okay for you to hold us accountable because we're telling you, we know this is important.

Each group does this back and forth to each other to build that accountability, so we can get to the results.

So I guess to kind of take it into one line or one bullet point of information that I would say about culture is...

Culture is everything about your team and it takes time and it takes effort and we choose culture by design over default.

Dan Friend

Dan, how do you go about instilling culture both from an organisational and a day by day point of view? How do you structure that all out at Lewis?

We've got a lot of things that are like checks and balances and things that are in place to help the young guys that come in.

So if you start out with a young guy, all our young guys have big brothers.

You come in and even in the summer before you come in, you get introduced to your big brother and they kind of help with pitfalls or things to watch for or teachers to take classes with. What does coach mean when he says this. Et cetera.

So these big brothers are a nice resource for them as they get into that first year. And that's a big thing.

We've got 'goal books' that we give all our guys as well as journals. The goal books have my philosophy and some rules in them.

We also do task lists once a week. And these task lists are divided in 3 mental, 3 skill based and 3 'outside of volleyball' tasks.

So maybe you put in: Hey, I wanna improve my step close attacking. Well, how do I do that? 'I need to be consciously aware that the ball's in front.'

So you give an action item and then how you're gonna achieve it. Some of these tasks that are outside tasks can be, Hey, I'm gonna study for this physics test. I might get two extra study sessions in.

This task list they do once a week, they have to come by my office and stop by every Monday to Tuesday, take 5 minutes, show me their task list, revisit a little bit.

It does a couple of things. It makes them put their collective thoughts in order for the week. It also forces them to have a conversation with me because incoming freshmen, when they come in they are scared of me and they don't wanna talk to me.

So this kind of breaks down that barrier a little bit. That's one really good one we've been doing for a long time.

We also set up study halls 4 times a week for their studies, which is really nice, all the incoming freshmen have to do that. And then anybody below a certain GPA has to do that also.

I do meetings twice a semester with them that are half an hour, 40 minutes long just to go through these series of questions and check on them.

And I think mental health has become a really important thing now. So we're really trying to make sure they're doing okay. Especially guys that are from a farther distance and homesick.

The guys do a good job of looking after each other also. I've been blessed that we've got this really good family culture.

And the nice thing about the wife coaching the women's team is both these teams are also super supportive of each other. Both at the games they go watch, but at the same time because they become friends.

We've had multiple players get married over the years. We've got one happening in a month. So I just think there's an interwoven mix with those 2 teams. And I think that kind of helps and is a support structure too at the same time.

But yeah, I think we certainly do a good amount of things for the guys, as they come in and as they continue to be here to kind of help them be in a good space and put some organisational tools in front of them, because it's a lot coming at them.

Certainly with the pandemic, that was a struggle with things being shut down and we lost maybe a few more guys than we normally do, but I think that was just the byproduct of how things were going and what guys were dealing with.

And we're still trying to figure out good ways to tackle some of those things.

We have an app that we use that's called Neurofuel.

It is something that Kirsten Booth from Creighton created with a doctor there, it's been a really good thing for us, and it's very volleyball specific, it talks about visualization, building blocks, it also goes over different breathing techniques.

So we jump into that side also.

We make every one of our incoming freshmen read 2 books, one's called 'The Inner Game Of Tennis' and the other one's called 'Four Agreements'. And with both those books, they have to do these one page reflections and give them to me. And we talk about it a little bit.

Every year we read a team book and we go through that book and all the guys do a one page reflection, and then we kind of correlate it to the team, and how we can use it that year.

Another thing we do is this positive/negative round table discussion.

So each guy does a positive and a negative for another guy, and then we compile them all. We sit around a round table, a guy gets the sheet of paper that shows all these positives, all these negatives. And he goes through them.

And he is like, well, Hey, what do you guys mean by this?

Having a bunch of guys open up in front of each other about some personal stuff, it certainly helps break down some of the barriers and those create a bond and a kind of closeness. I think that's a tough thing to do for any grown man, but let alone 18 to 22 year olds.

Those are a handful of things we do to stay on top of this stuff.

You mentioned a lot of interesting stuff. We could go deeper on all of them. The round table one for example, I can see that going wrong real quick also. What is your experience with that?

It's gotten heated sometimes.

And so I just have to direct it. I try not to jump in too much, but when it kind of gets heated for a little bit, we kind of direct it.

But it also teaches them about conflict. How do you approach conflict and not be scared of conflict. I'm big about that.

When something is bothering you, there's a right time to bring it up, but you also can't bag it and then put it away, because it's going to start to fester.

So you have to learn how to have those difficult conversations because in the end it just makes you better. It makes the team better.

It makes your relationship better. It's really important.

Hugh McCutcheon

The practice of agreeing on a mission statement and adhering to that is something that you implemented with the Men’s Team on the road to Beijing.

Assessing after every practice if you made strides in the right direction or not.

Reid Priddy:"When Hugh McCutcheon became the head coach of the USA Men’s Team following the 2004 Olympic Games, he had a specific vision of where he wanted to go.

In the opening summer of the quad, Hugh had all of us commit to a two-day mission statement workshop. NOBODY, besides Hugh, thought it was a valuable use of our time.

Young, athletic men sitting in small groups discussing future goals and making defined commitments is just not in our nature.
Looking back, it was one of THE most important moments for the team that would go on to win the gold medal.

What the process did for our team was provide everyone with a clear target, rather than leave it to be an assumed target, and helped us develop the road map to get there.

Hugh would hold us to it daily.

At the beginning of each practice something would be said about our goal and at the end of practice he would ask, did we take a step towards or away from our goal (there is no middle ground)? What is absolutely amazing is that I can only remember two practices where we took no ground. Two practices in four years!

I think that was due to the gym culture where everyone was focused on one common goal and it was mentioned and reinforced on a daily basis.
The mission established the culture and it became the instrument to measure all behavior and action."

Hugh, has that kind of conclusion after every practice remained to be a part of your end of practice ritual? A senior Men’s USA team going for gold is a different environment of course than a collegiate student athlete team in Minnesota.

Yeah, we do. It's a similar process, but again, it depends on the group.

So some years we might get into a mission process other years we might... if you look on YouTube, there's a video that the 2015 group made called 'Female Warrior'.

And really it was speaking to this idea of how they felt about the fact that society struggled to reconcile the fact that they were women and the fact that they were athletes and how they could do both.

And so I think we've tried to find ways where we can get the athletes to articulate their outcome goals.

Which really in my current environment don't change too much, we're trying to win the conference and we're trying to win the national championship. And that's that.

But the way we go about it. Making sure that we have a very clear idea of the behaviours that are going to support the best possible chance of achieving those outcomes.

That's really what it's about.

And finding ways for those groups to express those behaviours. Because it's committing to that, right?

Everybody wants to win, but not everybody's prepared to do what it takes to win.

Terry Liskevych

The first thing I would require every coach to do.

He or she must develop a philosophy and document it on paper, digitally, or in any other way they see fit, such as in Google Docs.

Because I believe it is critical to know oneself.

So I'd start by saying, "Hey, what's my life philosophy? What are the most important things that I look at? What is my coaching philosophy? This is what you can expect if you play for me."

That is the introspection that a coach must undertake before even considering how they will teach a skill, technique, or tactic.

And then, as a leader, a coach is a leader, he or she must convince the players to follow that leader.

And that is part of the art of coaching, where you must communicate effectively with a diverse group of people who are not like you. They may have different desires and needs, but they are on your team. How do you bring them all together?

Then comes the part where you have to get to know them.

And you should really do something like, for example, meet with a player and ask him or her this question. How can I coach you? How would you like me to coach you in order to help you become the best you can be? So you'll find out a little bit about them.

And then, when you meet with them, you should learn a little bit about them as a person.

This is especially important when coaching female athletes. Men are the same, but men are more hierarchical.

If I'm coaching you as a man, the first question you'll have is, "Does this coach know anything? Can this coach convince me that they will help me improve?"

If this coach tells me one thing one day and another the next, than I'm gonna lose your focus and respect to me.

So, when it comes to men, you have to make it a point to demonstrate that you are the alpha leader.

You'll start by determining who the other team leaders are, and then you'll proceed from there. Your job then is to be patient throughout the years of developing your program.

When I was in my second year at the University of Pacific, the head coach at another college in the Bay Area, San Jose State, was a lady named Jane Ward, and she was the captain of our 1964 and 1968 Olympic teams.

People here have forgotten who she was, she was a great athlete.

So she approached me and said: "Terry, I'm watching what you're doing, and you're doing a fantastic job. Continue to say what you're saying because the light bulb will go on for a third of them in their second to fourth year. For two thirds of them the light bulb will never turn on, but a third will be enough."

And that is a very important feature.

Can I get that core in a volleyball team of 3 to 5 players buy into my philosophy. They are hard workers on their own, they are self-starters, they want to be the best they can be, and they can espouse that to the team.

And they are in the locker room while you are not there.

Bill Walsh, the great American football coach, was one of my mentors, and he would always tell me, 'Terry, you've got to have your good players and leaders wrest, W R E S T, take away control of the locker room from you.'

And that's a very important statement because... you're not there. And I believe that is critical to a team's success.

So, in order, philosophy, having a plan, getting buy-in from players, meeting with players to understand who they are, ensuring that, asking them, and knowing how you're going to make them better, identifying that one-third of the players.

Then, of course, we can discuss skill development, tactics, and so on.

But I'll leave you with this.

Last year, a fantastic book was published about an American basketball coach named John Thompson, who coached at Georgetown. The book was an autobiography, he unfortunately died before it was published.

It was titled 'I Came As A Shadow,' and he discusses one of his mentors, Dean Smith, the legendary basketball coach at the University of North Carolina.

And he'd always say, 'John, 80% of what you do has nothing to do with basketball. It has nothing to do with the skills or tactics, but that 80% will determine whether you win or lose.'

And I believe it to be true because how much more skill can a coach know? So those are the things that you, as a coach, must understand as you progress. So there are many answers to your question, but that's my philosophy on how I'd approach it.

Laurent Tillie

Great things don't happen overnight, preparing and giving it enough time are of course important.

It's exactly like that.

When I took over the French national team, everybody was sad because we weren't able to qualify for the London Olympics.

'But are you really motivated to go to the Olympics?' Yeah!

'When did you start your preparation for the Olympics in London?' Ah, we started in April for the Olympic qualification tournaments.

Oh, that's why you didn't go.

We want to go to Rio? That's why we start the first camp, the opening ceremony day of the Olympics in London. Because talking about it, is not for me, doing, is for me.

So we started the preparation for Rio 2016 in 2012.

That gave us 4 years to prepare. That's the meaning of preparing something and giving yourself a chance to succeed.

Next up:

Terry Liskevych's Masterclass is close to completion. Expect that one to be dropped in your mailbox by next weekend.👍

After that we'll feature an extended practice video series.

Enjoy your day,

Matias



