===== SESSION: https://volleybrains.com/terry-liskevych/ =====

----- VIDEOS -----
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AVUHCYCe_jw
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bM55VHFMQBQ
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OSJPex6l_bE
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TH2KGeT9uDQ
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jWpLL1wWf4Y
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WeQSS0QRC94
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hsy4HV_yfyw
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Zi_nnbLAr4M
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1S0ALyBF-jA
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MZTbsJ2kqCk
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mfZW1X-arno
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eTWTUHdvbbs
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lJgpg6O3M8E
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DYdjSamOwPE
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=n0tdfVOK2aw
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_G1kfJaHH0Q

----- TEXTO -----
48. Terry Liskevych: 'There are no shortcuts.'

We had a couple of great calls with Terry Liskevych to be able to create this Masterclass. Terry's story begins with an immigrant upbringing, an early talent for coaching and progresses through becoming the head coach of the USA women's team, collegiate coaching and many business ventures.

In this Masterclass Terry discusses how he believes coaches should approach their own development and careers. What he sees is critical for the continued growth of volleyball in the United States. He also highlights the many people that influenced him and the biggest lessons he learned along the way.

Terry is such an eclectic person that every conversation with him just brings out tons of value.

This Masterclass is stacked with valuable resources, be sure to also go over all the pdf files that Terry shared with us (they are available as downloads)

Let's dive in!

Terry, when did you decide to become a volleyball coach? What drove you to make that decision?

My initial entry into volleyball was late.

I was a tennis player and a soccer player, and then, at the age of 17, I became the player-coach of my team.

But I knew nothing about volleyball. So I started looking at different books that were written, and there were very few books about volleyball in the mid-1960s.

I had a talent for learning and transcribing it into: What does my team do? How do we train and practice, and how do we perform in games?

While working with another team, a younger team, they kept telling me, "Hey, you're good at this. You're really good at coaching." So that boosted my interest.

I was still in college at the time, majoring in biology and pursuing a pre-medical career.

Then, late in my fourth year of college, I began playing for the Olympic coach's Club team; Jim Coleman was the Olympic coach in 1968. Kennett Allen was the name of his Chicago club team. And I began playing on that team while attending medical school.

And then one day Jim said to me: "if you're not going to stay in medical school (because he knew that I was kind of debating) you could come and help me out."

He was going to become a coach at a college outside of Chicago where he was teaching chemistry, at George Williams College.

And so, after a year, I decided to leave med school, and go work as his assistant coach. While getting my master's degree in physical education, despite never having taken a physical education class as an undergraduate.

So that was my entry point into coaching.

At the time, I was coaching men as a player-coach at George Williams College, and then I started coaching a very good women's team in the Chicago area with four national team players. The Chicago Volleyball Club was its name.

That was my first foray into coaching women. I coached men as an assistant at George Williams before moving on to coach men at Ohio State from 1974 to 1976.

So that's how I got started as a coach.

It came later, but it was something I enjoyed and was good at.

What advice would you give to yourself as a new coach? A piece of advice that is so obvious and logical to you now, but that you had to develop over time.

Well, I believe there's a two-pronged advice: 'hey, failure is okay,' whether it's losing a match or not performing a skill correctly.

That is 'the learning process'.

So I've always said to people, failure is tuition for the future.

You need to understand that early on, because you may become frustrated, but there are many things in life that we want but don't get. That's fine as long as we stay on track.

And the second part of that, which is somewhat related to it, is that "hey, everything takes longer than you think, and nothing in life that is worth doing is easy."

Whether it's relationships, parenting, coaching, playing as an athlete, or business.

If somebody says it's easy, that means they haven't done it.

You need to learn that it's a process, and everything takes longer. So be patient and stick to your plan. And if you don't reach your goal, it's fine to reset it or even change course.

We've talked about it before: 'hey, you have to enjoy what you do.'

And if you don't enjoy what you do, even if it's very difficult, you must stay the course because there are a lot of boring, mundane things that you may have to do in order to become accomplished.

Do you have a specific goal in mind? Perhaps a goal that you have already achieved or one that is so difficult to achieve that it provides you with daily motivation?

Knowing myself, I'm a developer, which means that I'm good at taking things from zero to good.

Whether it's teams, I've had teams that were a year old like when I arrived at the University of Pacific, and in four years we went to the division I final four and went to five final fours.

The same is true for the national team. When I took over in 1985, they were a very successful silver medalist in 1984, a bronze medalist and World Championship winner in 1982, and one of the best teams in the world in 1980, despite not going to the Olympics.

But then everyone retires. And I always tell people that when I was the head coach in 1985, our first competition was against the number three Korean 'club team'...not even the national team.

We played seven matches. We didn't win a single set. We didn't win a single set or a match. And in ten years, we became the world's number one. So I'm a developer.

Similarly in business... I've started several companies: Total Sports, Inc., ARK Digital Technologies, Paragon Marketing before this one, and Total Sports Art of Coaching.

We started Art of Coaching 12 years ago as a live clinic event series with three top coaches, two top collegiate coaches who have won the most national championships in American Women's College. Penn State's Russ Rose, and Stanford's John Dunning, formerly of the University of Pacific, and then myself as an Olympic coach.

But it morphed into something else, I wanted to create a website.

And I wanted to create a website with really good content that is also updated every week with new content.

And I wanted to do it not only in volleyball (Art of Coaching Volleyball), but also in softball, baseball, and football (Art of Coaching American Football).

We expected it to be much faster, but we've stuck with it; this is our 12th year. And we made it through the pandemic, which was difficult because everything shut down for our live events.

In 2020, for example, we had 7 volleyball clinics planned and 2 softball clinics, but we only held 1 volleyball clinic. That's all.

That was difficult for our company because these events accounted for 35% of our gross revenue.

But we made it, and we're planning to reinvest more in the Art of Coaching Softball. In volleyball, we will stay the course. We may reduce the number of live clinics and increase the number of virtual clinics.

Third, we're launching the Art of Pickleball, which is big in the United States. It's similar to how padel has taken off as a sport in Europe.

So, in my mind, my philosophy is: Hey, I want to develop something, take it to a certain level, then have other people like my partner here, Mark Tilson who is very good, be the CEO.

Succession is therefore set up.

My life goal right now, Matias, is simple. I enjoy mentoring coaches and business people.

I like mentoring coaches and people in business, and I like doing that, not necessarily for financial gain.

But because I've learned so much about how not to do things that I can help people cut down on some of the errors that they seem to be making.

Even though, yes, it's better to make errors yourself, better to have failure, because you're gonna learn better that way.

You're gonna remember that a lot better than if somebody tells you, don't do it that way.

Beyond development, one of my strengths is connecting with good people. I have a large digital Rolodex of people who are skilled in a variety of professions and on whom I can rely.

I also know they're reliable. That is extremely important to me.

Because I believe you only live once, and you need to figure out how you can make the world a better place. That's the kind of theory I like.

I want to find out if I can help someone become a better coach, a better person, a better businessperson, a better leader, or a better manager.

Those are objectives that I am eager to achieve in the future.

Terry: Did I send you the presentation by American ice hockey coach Greg Carvel?

Matias: No, I don't think so.

It's one of the best things on high-performance culture. He is the head coach of the men's ice hockey team at the University of Massachusetts.

When he arrived, they had finished last in their league for four years in a row. And he won the national championship in four years.

Everything he does is based on the book Legacy, which I believe is one of the best books ever written. I wish I had it when I started out because it was only written in 2013.

I wish I had read that in the 1970s.

It has so many great things about teams, looking at the culture of the All Blacks, New Zealand's rugby team. What makes them special? This is a cultural thing, as well as about accountability.

You'll enjoy his entire thing. It's really good. It's a YouTube presentation that I thought was so good that I transcribed it after watching it four or five times.

Because it was so good.

Let's talk a bit about team management and organization in general, which foundational work should a coach do here?

The first thing I would make every coach do.

He or she must develop a philosophy and document it on paper, digitally, or in any other way, they see fit, such as in Google Docs.

Because I believe it is critical to know oneself.

So I'd start by saying, "Hey, what's my life philosophy?" What are the most important factors that I take into account?

So, what is my coaching philosophy? This is what you can expect if you play for me.

That is the introspection that a coach must undertake before even considering how they will teach a skill, technique, or tactic.

And then, as a leader, a coach is a leader, in my opinion. He or she must convince the players to follow that leader.

And that is part of the art of coaching, where you must communicate effectively with a diverse group of people who are not like you. They may have different desires and needs, but they are on your team.

How do you bring them all together?

Then comes the part where you have to get to know them. And you should really meet with a player and ask him or her this question, How can I coach you? How would you like me to coach you in order to help you become the best you can be? So you'll find out a little bit about them.

And then, when you meet with them, you should learn a little bit about them as people. Anson Dorrance, a great American soccer coach who has won 22 National Championships, he won the first Women's World Cup in soccer in 1991.

His comment is always, 'They could care less how much you know unless they know how much you care.'

This is especially important when coaching female athletes. Men are the same, but men are more hierarchical. If I'm coaching you as a man, the first question you'll have is, "Does this coach know anything?" Can this coach convince me that they will help me improve?

If this coach tells me one thing one day and another the next, he's going to lose my respect.

So, when it comes to men, you have to make it a point to demonstrate that you are the alpha leader. You'll start by determining who the other team leaders are, and then you'll proceed from there.

Your job then is to be patient throughout the years of developing your program.

When I was in my second year at the University of Pacific, the head coach at another college in the San Francisco Bay Area at San Jose State, was a lady named Jane Ward, and she was the captain of our 1964 and 1968 Olympic teams.

She has been a fantastic athlete. People here have forgotten who she was.

Well she approached me and said, 'Terry, I'm watching what you're doing, and you're doing a fantastic job. Continue to say what you're saying because the light bulb will go on for a third of them in their second to fourth year for two-thirds of them the light bulb will never turn on. But a third will suffice.'

That is a very important feature.

Can I get that core in a volleyball team of 3 to 5 players who buy into my philosophy, who are hard workers on their own, who are self-starters, who want to be the best they can be, and who can then espouse that to the team.

They are there in the locker room while you are not present. Bill Walsh, the great American football coach, was one of my mentors, and he would always tell me, 'Terry, you've got to have your good players and leaders wrest, W R E S T, take away control of the locker room from you.' And that is a critical statement because you are not present.

And I believe that is critical to a team's success.

So in order, philosophy, having a plan, getting buy-in from players, meeting with players to understand who they are, let them understand how you're going to make them better. Identifying that one-third, that core group of players.

And then obviously we can talk about the development of skill and tactics and so forth.

But I'll leave you with this. Last year, a fantastic book was published about an American basketball coach named John Thompson, who coached at Georgetown. The book was an autobiography, he had passed away before it even came out.

It was titled 'I Came As A Shadow,' and he talks about one of his mentors, Dean Smith, the legendary basketball coach at the University of North Carolina.

And he'd always say,  'John, 80% of what you do has nothing to do about basketball. It has nothing to do with the skills, the tactics, but that 80% is gonna determine whether you win or lose.'

And I believe it is true because how much more skill can a coach know and teach?

And it's a common thing in a lot of sports for teams to try to do tactically what they can't do technically.

So those are the things that you, as a coach, must understand as you progress.

So there are many answers to your question, but that's my philosophy on how I'd approach it.

I ended up playing pro volleyball for 17 years. And what you said about men's volleyball coaches having to tell the same thing every day, really rings a bell.

It only takes a bad half-hour as a coach to ruin an entire season. Not to sound too dramatic. But I had coaches throw away an entire team in half an hour, just because they lacked that consistency.

My son was a very good soccer player in high school. And the coach, who was also the head of the social studies department, was a wonderful person.

But he'd say something like, 'If you're late the second time, you're not going to play.'

Okay.

Every time the best player was late, he'd still play 'em.

And I told him 'Jerry, once you draw the line for men, that line can't be changed.' Because once it changes, you're done. They will never believe you.

I was always tough on some of my best players. Because I'd tell them that I owe it to them to make them the best they can be. So I'm gonna hold you to a higher standard.

I'm holding the same standard to the entire team, but I may hold you to a higher standard.

Because I want to get everything out of your innate talent. Don't waste it.

And you've played with some great players. When I played with some of these players, I'd always say, "I wish I had his physicality."

How good would I be?  But that's just the way life is.

Female volleyball has taken off in the United States in recent years(decade). The men's side isn't really following, but something is going on there.

What do you want to see happen? Or what do you believe is possible in the States?

First and foremost, I would like to see a high-quality professional men's and women's league.

We've had a lot of attempts, and I believe the only league that we had was the IVA in the late 1970s and early 1980s, with Wilt Chamberlain and the best players from Poland who joined after the Olympics in 1976.

Some of the best players in the world came, but they were banned because they said you couldn't be 'a professional', in those days, which is ridiculous.

Since then there have been startup leagues for men and women.

So, for starters, I'd like to see an excellent professional league. And the intention must be that it is valuable to the players, that it is profitable, that it will eventually become profitable, that it will be broadcast on national television, and so on.

Women's volleyball in college is currently very popular in the United States, and it has grown in popularity since the mid-1970s as a result of Title ix, a law that provides equal opportunity for women in educational institutions.

What happened? They had to balance American football because it consumed so much money and so many scholarships.

As a result, men's sports in college, such as volleyball, wrestling, track and field, and swimming, suffered. They took away their scholarships and then expanded the scholarships for women. That is number one.

The proliferation of club volleyball in America is number two. Junior club volleyball, especially for girls. What exactly happened? That grew as a result of college scholarships, which paid for people's tuition to attend college.

1200 colleges offer women's volleyball at all levels. Division 1, Division 2, Division 3, NCAA, NAIA, NGCAA, all of that. Men's volleyball has fewer than 120 schools, so one-tenth.

I think it's remarkable that our men's team is competitive internationally despite not having the same depth as the women's team.

And I could tell you that women's volleyball has gotten better and better, particularly through the number of players playing internationally.

We had some very good players when I was coaching, but beyond our 6-7 top players, we didn't have a lot of options.

The depth of the teams right now is so great that there's a lot of great talent to choose from. While Karch Kiraly has done an excellent job, there is also a lot of talent to choose from.

I'd also like to see better skills taught to children at a young age. Technical skills.

Because too many coaches at the club level will get a good player who is a good athlete because of her physicality, cuz she can jump well, she's quick, she has a good arm. But they don't teach her the proper techniques to truly become what she could be.

To have a variety of shots, if she's an attacker. Have a lot of good reading skills, if she's a defender or a blocker, you know, to really know what's happening on the court.

That, I believe, should be done at a higher level.

Finally, I'll mention coaching education. The club system is such... and I'll use an example from soccer, where my children played club soccer.

Surf Soccer in San Diego is a large club, one of the best in America. The club houses 800 boys and girls.

So you might have a 16-and-under age range with four teams. The first team is excellent. The second team may be quite good, but the third and fourth teams are only concerned with keeping the players happy.

Parents are happy because they are paying to play. After all, club volleyball in this country is paid to play, so you're becoming a consumer.

As a result, those coaches do not improve. They don't care. They simply want to please the players and their parents. And I believe that that is something I would change.

I would make certain that every coach is educated.

What is the purpose of his or her coaching? How are they gonna get better? Because they can affect a life, like you said, Hey, a coach can all of a sudden in half an hour destroy the confidence of a player forever.

I played soccer for some crazy coaches.

I believe that better coach education is an urgent need in America.

Because there are so many players competing and not enough coaches who know what they're doing at the younger levels.

Finally, I believe our national governing body, USA Volleyball, could do better.

It has never marketed this sport as well as it could. During their golden years, again, looking back, the years 84 to 96, 2000, were the golden years of beach volleyball, and indoor volleyball, the men and women were very good, and we should have formed a pro league.

We should have had all sorts of things going on at the time. And I hold the national governing body responsible. They're nice people, but they're volleyball people that don't know anything about business.

Then they go out and hire business people who know nothing about volleyball.

It's a bad combination.

What rule change would you like to see turned back or implemented? What impact would you like to see these changes have on the game?

I certainly don't like the let serve to be legal. That's a crazy way to score a point, in my opinion.

Men's volleyball, particularly international volleyball, needs to change where you land behind the three-meter line, in my opinion.

Even if they hit a bic from position six, they'll end up at the center line. So I think that I would take a look at that.

I think a double-hit call is absurd in volleyball because I always compare it to basketball. If Matias and Terry are playing basketball and I pass a ball to you, nobody's grading the pass, because if I give you a bad pass, you're not gonna be in a good position to shoot or whatever.

If you're an attacker and I give you a bad set, you will be at a disadvantage. And because of these ref calls, there are too many starts and stops.

It's kind of counterintuitive, when you walk into a gymnasium and it's a high school team or a young team playing, there are so many whistles and nobody knows what the whistles are.

Let the game be played.

I grew up during the side-out era, but I like rally score. I thought the reason we changed it wasn't valid, they did that because they wanted to make the Asian men's teams more competitive.

I always said, if you want to make it very competitive, use rally score and I recommend playing the best 4 out of 7 sets to 11 or 15 because you'll have a lot more upsets.

Rigth now it doesn't happen very often that you can upset a team, however, if the sets were made shorter, there would be more opportunities for upsets.

So those are some of the things I'd look into.

Remember, when I first started playing the game, you couldn't penetrate over the net while blocking. You could have four people blocking.

You received balls overhand, and they had to be clean, and everyone clapped as you touched the ball so the referee wouldn't hear the sound of the ball. So many things changed.

The antenna was invented by Jim Coleman. I was his graduate student at the time, and before fiberglass, we only had this cheap plastic that would simply shatter when it was hit.

The antenna really changed the game because, if I'm an outside hitter and I'm hitting a quick set to the outside, I could hit it really sharp, but the antenna is now in the way.

Back then the antenna was away from the sideline. Now it's on the sideline.

So lots of things change, and all sports change.

People get all upset that you're changing the rules. No sport has not had its rules changed.

Even in soccer in the past, the goalkeeper had to take a certain amount of steps.

Now there are more substitutions. At a certain temperature and humidity, there is rest and a break.

Of course, after hearing so many coaches. There have been a lot of opinions that have changed my own mind also. And it's definitely about:

Have the least amount of interruptions possible.

No. That is something I agree with. That's what I've always said.

And back in the day, when you needed these paddles to sub in and out. I'd say, why not do it like in basketball, go to the scores table, tell 'em you'tr going in, and you go in.

The same thing happens in soccer. Just go to the fourth referee and say, "I'm going in for Matias." Number 12 will replace number 9. Great. Next break I'm in, they're out.

So, fewer interruptions, making it as clear as possible for any spectator. Already our sport is highly technical and difficult to understand.

Another aspect I discussed with international officials is that it can't be about you; it has to be about the players first.

The most important thing to remember in any sport is that it is all about the players. Coaches come in second, but officials should come in last.

Consider what tennis has done to eliminate the linespeople at major events.

I believe that some Grand Slams, such as Wimbledon, will continue to have lines people. But the others, the US Open and the Australian Open, there you just have Hawkeye and that's it. And Hawkeye is going to be as accurate as anybody.

The best game you've ever seen. What recent or game from the volleyball vaults did validate once more that volleyball is the greatest sport on the planet?

The 74 World Championships, in which Poland defeated the Soviet Union, was a fantastic match in my opinion.

Holland vs. Italy in the men's Olympic final in 1996.

Whereas, in the end, Holland came back to win it. In the fifth set, I believe the score was 17-15 or 19-17.

There are many of them, as well as matches in which I have participated as a coach.

Two matches come to mind: the semifinal in Barcelona against Cuba, and whoever won that match would go on to win the gold medal the next day.

That was a back-and-forth. The first set was won by us. They took the second set, we took the third, and they took the fourth. In the fifth, it was 10 all, 11 all.

In 2000, there were some fantastic women's matches with Brazil and Cuba.

And I was a huge fan of the USA men in 1984 and 1988, especially in 1988.

One of the great matches was the Olympic quarterfinals, where a very good Argentina team, led by Conte, Quiroga, and Uriarte, was up against the USA Men, 2 sets to 0.

And I'll never forget it because Karch was the captain, and when they switched sides, I was sitting there and heard him say, "Hey, we're not losing this match."

I was enthralled by the 2021* Olympics. Because the men's side was so competitive, I really enjoyed watching it. Don't get me wrong, the USA women played well, but I don't think the women's tournament was as high-level as the men's. The men's tournament was extremely competitive.

Many teams had a chance to win that competition.

I believe I never watched more international volleyball than during the Tokyo Olympics. I enjoyed the men's side because there were so many good teams France, Russia, the United States, Brazil, and so on.

If you can put together the best starting six in the world. What would your team look like?

Yes, those are interesting questions.

On the men's side, I'd go with Karch and Giba without a doubt. And there are so many good players on the men's side right now that it would be difficult.

And I don't know much about the men's game other than what I've seen as a fan rather than as a coach.

On the women's side, there have been so many good players internationally. Mireya Luis was the greatest player who ever played in my opinion, pound for pound or inch for inch.

That ferocity with which she played the game and the way she was off the court, just a beautiful human being. On the court, boy, she is ferocious.

Lan Ping was an excellent hitter for China. A player that I coached that was good was Paula Weishoff. Lots come to mind.

Brazil, I thought, was well led by Venturini, their setter. She was a hitter in the '88 Olympics and then became a setter.

Peru was a team that people don't remember much about, but they were a great team for many years. They were good from 1979 to 1996, with Gaby Perez as their outstanding middle player and Cecilia Tait as their opposite player, a lefthander.

Tara Cross-Battle, who played for the United States in four Olympics, was probably one of the most consistent players I coached.

And, as you move into these teams that I didn't coach, there were some incredible athletes for the US, whether it was Logan Tom or Foluke Akinradewo. There are far too many to list.

Current day, the opposite in Serbia, Boskovic, she's terrific. I'd be planning how... hey, what do I need to do to stop her? But she's pretty tough to stop.

And on the men's side, people don't remember the Cuban men's teams of the late sixties. They had some insane guys, one of whom was Diego Lapera. I'll show you a picture of him. (in the video clip above)

He was 183-184 centimeters tall. But take a look at this. This is not an optical illusion.

He has his chest above the net.

Eddie Skorek from Poland, together with Tomasz Wójtowicz and Gosciniak, all 3 of them, are great players.

Savin, the Soviet Union's great middle blocker. Chestnikov who won a gold medal as a player and then coached the men's team.

But those were the old days.

There are a lot of good players nowadays.

If you could have a gigantic billboard anywhere with anything on it — metaphorically speaking, getting a message out to every athlete or coach on the globe — what would it say and why?

There are no shortcuts.

Everything takes longer than one thinks.

Do you have an unusual habit? Or you can talk about something out of the realm of volleyball that you really like.

I'm an avid reader.

One thing I did during the pandemic was catalog all of my books on an Excel spreadsheet with the title of the book, author, publisher, ISBN, and how much it's worth.

So I've got 3,400 books. And I did it so that I could show my children, my son and daughter, that when I die, that they shouldn't get rid of some of these books because they are valuable.

A strange habit that I've gotten into...I walk early in the morning and I walk between 6 and 7 miles, and it takes about an hour and 45 minutes. And I listen to podcasts while walking. I have a variety of podcasts that I listen to.

And now that I have an extended family of three granddaughters, it's about spending time with them. And we're extremely fortunate to have our two children so close by. My daughter lives 10 minutes away, and my son lives 15 minutes away. My daughter has two daughters, and my son has one.

It's wonderful to have them here. And it's nice to see them again because they had previously lived in Wisconsin, Virginia, and Chicago, respectively.

So that's what makes my day, and then, as we've said before, I enjoy what I do, and I'm fortunate that I enjoy coming to work.

I consider myself extremely fortunate to be an immigrant child who came to this country and learned a great deal from my father and mother.

And I was lucky to get into the line of work that I did and loved every minute of it.

And I believe it's always been a good symbiotic relationship between me and the people I've worked with.

It's been a wonderful life.

Did you develop some new behaviors over the last few years?

Walking is a new habit for me. I stopped running around 15 years ago.

I was also an avid racquetball player, but during the pandemic, they closed down racquetball.

So I began playing pickleball. So that's a habit that I've picked up. And then there's one thing I've done. I became more interested in nutrition myself.

So those are a few things.

And then there's the fact that I've always known that I have a wide range of interests, I'm quite eclectic.

So, if anything, I look back and say, Hey, I'm glad that, even if it may have detracted from a couple of things, I have no regrets.

I mean, I have some regrets, but they are more professional in nature. Jobs that I may have desired and didn't get.

But, you know, I have no regrets about how my life turned out.

Ending Terry's masterclass with 2 non transcribed clips of our video call. Next to the 'volleybrains' questions, and if they're available we're going to start to share more of these. (why not :-))

Terry's favorite Olympic Story

Terry's library

Other documents that Terry shared and that are definitely worth taking a good look at:

Thank you, Terry!



