===== SESSION: https://volleybrains.com/andrea-anastasi/ =====

----- VIDEOS -----
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1D6rTpRTCp8

----- TEXTO -----
5. Andrea Anastasi:'A coach must follow his own path, make up his own plan.'

Andrea started to coach in Brescia in 1994, other Italian clubs, the Italian National Team, the Spanish National Team, Italy again, Polish clubs, Belgium...now we are 26 years later and Andrea coaches the team of Verva Warszawa in Poland. At lot to look back at. A lot of lessons for any coach in his answers. Enjoy.

Andrea, why and how many years ago did you decide to commit to being a professional volleyball coach? What pushed you towards that decision?

I was studying physical education in Bologna. And already while studying I decided I wanted to become a volleyball coach.

For sure I enjoyed being a player for many years. But with volleyball not being that professional in the 80’s and the early 90’s, I thought I had the biggest chance of 'living my sport’ if I would become a coach.

I was playing as an outside hitter while being 1 meter 83 tall, I don’t have to explain to you that that wasn’t an easy job.:-) When I became 30 years old I figured out it was time to transition into becoming a coach.

For me it really felt like a natural thing to do. I really wanted to test and show my concepts. I was very motivated to show that I was capable of doing that.

Being a young coach has many advantages. Younger coaches have amazing energy and that is something that I like to ‘use’ even today. I, myself, really get energised from working with young coaches that are very motivated to learn and break out.

What advice would you give yourself as a starting coach? An advice that is so clear and logic for you now, but that you had to develop over the years.

To do the same as I did in that period. :-)

No, what I did was develop ideas about the game, taking notes of every practice that I was in. When I was playing in Modena (1980-1983) those notes were mostly coming from Gian Paolo Guidetti’s practices (Giovanni Guidetti’s uncle).

Taking notes, asking questions, I really wanted to start out my coaching career with the advice from the best coaches around. The continuous development of yourself as a coach is so important. You must be able to grow your own skills before you’re capable of ‘growing’ or improving players.

The future of volleyball, how will the game evolve according to your opinion? What kind of improvements can be made?

Interesting question. In the last 10 years, our game changed a lot. There is more involvement of performance/physical trainers in volleyball.

And simply said, in the past we trained too much. The right balance between focus on the technical skills, building and maintaining the physicality and taking the time to really recover is what is needed. Physiotherapists, doctors, there is a great synergy in my teams.

From a technical perspective I don’t know if we can discover a lot more. For sure an improvement can be made in the off-season, not everybody plays on a high level national team. Some kind of 'camp' could be interesting. Where players learn to focus on technicality, physicality….but also the mental approach, all of that without being in a situation that there is a game being played every 4 days.

According to you, what rule change is necessary in the future? And why would you want to see this new rule implemented?

I don’t think we need to stop gameplay for an invasion of the opponent's court IF a player doesn’t disturb his opponent.

Another thing, but it’s a difficult one to solve, is the first touch in defense. The first touch can be more freely interpreted. But it won’t make it easier to judge.

You are Dr. Frankenstein and have the ability to put together the world's most performing volleyball player. Which characteristics would he/she have.

This is really difficult. Okay, the mental side of the game, I will need Kubiak for that. Spiking will be Leon, receiving will be Juantorena. If you can mix all of these together...well I think 3 characteristics are enough to make a crazy player.

For an opposite, a player that spikes a lot of balls, I prefer players that are also very technical, in the past we had Ivan Miljkovic for example. Not just a player with one unstoppable spike and no other solutions. I like to see allround players on that position.

Best game you've ever seen. Very simple, what recent or game from the volleyball vaults did validate once more that volleyball is the greatest sport on the globe.

So many amazing matches. And very hard to remember specifics if you are a fan of volleyball, like every coach is.

If I have to name one it’s the final of the European Championships in 2007. We (Andrea was coaching the Spanish National Men's Team) won 3-2 and 16-14 in the 5th set against Russia in Moscow.

When preparing a new game (next weekend), how does your general approach look like?

Of course I am the head of staff and have the main responsibility. But I also call it ‘staff work’. Our scoutmen work all week to analyse games of our opponents and bundle all that data into usable information.

My assistant coach, well I want that he also develops a game strategy. Just like he would have to do if he would be the head coach. In that way him and me can discuss our overall tactic and will come to a game plan that has been discussed and evaluated.

In preparing a game we focus a good part on the skill of the opponent's middle blocker and the specific capabilities of the outside blockers.

Of course we have a lot of info after all the work is done. Making it understandable for our players is the most important step.

How has a failure, or apparent failure, set you up for later success? Do you have a “favorite failure” of yours?

I’ve had a lot of failures in my career. A lot of defeats that in those moments looked insurmountable.

The first big failure as a coach was the quarter final of the World Championships in 2002. I was coaching the Italian National Team, we arrived in the quarter finals where we lost 3-2 and 16-14 in the fifth against Brazil. In the end we got the 5th spot, which wasn’t a ranking where anybody should have been satisfied with.

Another failure was in 2005, I was coaching Cuneo in 2003-2005. The first season was ‘ok’, well, just good enough. But the second season our performance was just subpar and we never really got out of it.

After that I really needed a break. I used the time available to reflect on what happened, reflect on my coaching, and reflect on my future.

The year after that I started to coach the Spanish National team, with new energy, new ideas about volleyball, the biggest part of how I train my teams today had their foundation in that period.

We just talked about our great win against Russia and becoming the European Champion with the Spanish team, it was a remarkable time, that is for sure.

If you can make the strongest 'starting six' in the world, right now. What would your team look like? Why did you choose these players? Female or Male depending on your expertise.

Again a difficult question.  As a setter I would start with Lloy Ball. As an opposite for sure Miljkovic. Outside hitters; Lorenzo Bernardi and Leon.

Middle blockers, there are so many, Piotr Nowakowski and Andrea Gardini probably.

But with all those years that I’ve been in our game, it’s really impossible to just eliminate all the legends of our game.

You have Karch Kiraly, Giba, Nalbert, ...I answered the question, but at the same time it’s an impossible question to answer.

Do you have a book that you like a lot? Which lessons did you get out of it?

Yes, 'Essentialism: The Disciplined Pursuit of Less' by Gregg McKeown. When I read this book, I really acknowledged that THIS was what it was about.

What is one of the best or most worthwhile investments you’ve ever made?

We are talking about sports, my life in sports. For sure the work of a coach is all about making the individual better, a better athlete, a better man.

I invest a lot of time into the mental aspect of the game. The key to unlock my players is first helping them figure out who they are, what they can be for themselves and for our team.

That is the starting point. After all these years, that is the place where I invest a lot of time and I will keep on doing that.

What advice would you give to a smart, driven young coach about to enter the  “professional coaching world”?

Yes, a very clear advice even. Every coach has to follow his own path, make up his own plan. How do you get to that plan? Well you don’t copy anybody, you can not copy a style or a way of behaving.

You learn from anything and everything. What are players reacting to during the game, how do coaches react, watching games from the past and following the latest matches, figuring out differences and figuring out how our game is evolving. The 3 aspects that we talked about, technical, tactical and mental. Focus on all 3.

Even in a literal sense. At home in Italy I have an entire library, full of interesting books; my time at home I pass picking them up, reading parts here and there, thinking about forms of implementation of these ideas. That is the life of a coach.

A follow up to the last question. Maybe even more important, what advice should they ignore? What are bad recommendations you hear about coaching or training volleyball?

I don’t think I have a good answer for this question. I really believe that every experience and any data or information that you can gather as a coach is important.

The trick is of course to know what to do with it. Do you act, do you wait, do you commit 100%...that all comes with experience.

What stays very true is that as a coach you are a generalist, even though you have an entire staff helping you, you also need to understand more than the basics of everything. I’m talking about the physical work and the mental work first and foremost.

And for my own support, I have a personal friend who is a psychologist. For 15 years we have cooperated and helped each other out in our professions. It really helped me to grow, to improve my decision making.

Is there a rule change that you want to see turned back? Why is that?

Short answer. No, I don’t think there are big issues, but honestly I just like to look forward, in all I do I don't focus on the past. Rules will keep on changing, we’ll see what will happen.

If you could have a gigantic billboard anywhere with anything on it — metaphorically speaking, getting a message out to every athlete or coach on the globe — what would it say and why?

I think this is the most logic answer and probably a lot of coaches will say the same on this one.

‘You play like you train’. Players that realise and know that they themselves are responsible for their game, their career, well, they train with the right amount of focus.

Once everybody is more or less at that level, teams really change.

In the last five years, what new belief, behaviour, or habit has most improved your life?

Yes again, 2 things actually, I talked about essentialism before.

The first one is that I’m ruthless about time and lost time. When we are having a team practice, mostly in the afternoons, we move swiftly to the core of the practice.

The second thing and that became a non negotiable is that I only coach players that are ready to practice.

Players need to be fresh and ready to train. We travel a lot, it’s not always easy to find the right balance, we invest a lot in recovery. Training and coaching players that are tired or not recharged is just not logical.

When you feel overwhelmed or unfocused, or have lost your focus temporarily, what do you do? (If helpful: What questions do you ask yourself?)

After all these years you become good at knowing when you hit these moments.

The right thing for me is to put what is happening on the sidelines for a moment and grab a good book. It became very clear to me that that is my go-to action to reset and recalibrate. At the moment that book would be Legacy.

Yes, again about sports and management. :-)

Thanks for your answers, Andrea!

Volleybrain readers, also take a look at this short twitter clip below, it shows off Andrea's coaching style and gives a short look into his career(even as a player)...and if you are a Spanish speaker you should give that account a follow.

@anastasi60 #voleibol #volleyball #pallavolo #voley pic.twitter.com/Bsb5KUchtt

Next week we'll have Luka Slabe on volleybrains.com. Luka is the current assistant coach of the USA Women's National Team. And head coach of NC State WVB. Have a week!



