So, the first thing I want to talk about, we're talking, often we're talking about strategy, and sometimes we're talking about tactic, and it's pretty confusing.
I want to clarify this type of topic.
It means the difference between strategy and tactic.
Basically, strategy is the big picture, okay?
The strategy can be the strategy for the team, where we're going in August, where we're starting, where we have to be in May, where we're done in the progression, okay?
It can be a monthly strategy, it can be the strategy of the game, but it's still the big picture, what we want to do, okay?
The tactic is like how we do it.
It's completely different, okay?
So, this thing has to be clear, but there are two different things.
Mostly with the younger one, they figure it out, they have to understand this thing, because sometimes we say, okay,
we're going to play a lot.
We're going to play a lot with the middle in this game, because the middle and the other side are weak, or blocking.
And now, because of this, they start standing to the middle from the 20 feet.
So, both of that are impossible to hit.
So, no, this is the strategy of the game, but it has to apply when the game allows us to do that, okay?
This is really important to understand.
So, we're going to talk about both of these things, and how to apply it during the game.
So, first of all, we cannot talk about tactic if we don't have the skills.
Why?
And that's why we were talking about how to do things.
Because imagine I have a setter, and we decide that this game is really important for us, playing the gap.
I don't know how people call it.
Someone is calling seven, someone is calling gap, someone is calling C.
Basically, the middle block.
The middle blocker, far from the setter.
In front of the setter, but like eight feet, nine feet far from the setter, okay?
So, we decide to use this ball mostly during this game.
But if my setter or my middle is not able to hit this ball or to set this ball, how I can use it?
After half of the set, the other team understand they're not using it, so they don't care about it.
So, first of all, I have to be able to teach my setter.
I have to be able to teach my setter to set every type of ball from every type of pass as much as he can.
At that point, when the portfolio of the ability of my setter are big enough, at this point, the strategy and the tactic I can use is going to be much, much, much bigger.
So, the card we have to play the game are much more than just if I know how to set front and back.
So, this is really important to understand.
We cannot ask the setter to do crazy thing.
Why did they know to do the basic stuff, okay?
So, when we're talking about tactic, where we're starting from, because there's different level of the game, okay?
I was like taking some notes in these days about setter, you know, how we prepare the game for our setter, for the other setter with the national team.
And, you know, it's like natural to do that.
And there's so many things that we're going to spend 45 minutes.
It's about that.
But you have to imagine that the way you start the setter, like where the pass is coming from.
So, what I'm saying, where the pass is going.
And now, where the pass is going, where the pass is coming from.
Which are my tendencies.
And now, what if the pass is very perfect, just off, very off, zone two, zone four.
So, what happens after a certain point of the set?
How is he playing?
How is he playing when his front throw is back row?
So, how is he playing when the other setter is, there's a weak blocker over there, like a short setter.
How is he playing when the setter is front throw?
Or when the right side is front throw?
So, all this type of tendency, and trust me, like millions of numbers that you're watching, okay?
But, the very first thing we have to think about, you know, is like, like a setter, I have to know myself.
It doesn't matter the level, okay?
The coach has to know his setter.
Even if he's coaching 14, 13, 12, okay?
We're working on making, like you say, the best set I can in that position.
There's no trick in the block until you're ready and advanced.
The first point for the setter, for me, is like making a good set.
Making a hitter in the best condition possible.
Okay?
So.
So, I remember back in the day, I have a, once with the national team, they were probably one of the best setters ever.
I don't know if you remember, because you're much younger than me.
His name was Kim Ho-Chul.
Actually, he is Kim Ho-Chul.
He's still alive.
And he was a Korean setter.
Well, he's like, trust me, I don't think he was taller than the bottom line of the net.
Okay?
Gans are bigger like this.
But you cannot.
Understand what he was setting.
At all.
It was unbelievable.
And the first thing he said, he told me, you know, Marco, there's two different type of setters.
There's the waders.
And there's the leader.
It was not, I would say leader, but I can say a bad word, like a B.
The B word, you know?
It's like, oh, A word.
So.
The wader is the one that is trying to set.
The best ball for the hitter.
It means if you are a shorter hitter playing very fast, I strike, set the ball as fast as we can.
If you are a, you know, a player who need a higher ball because you're like stronger physically and you need just a higher ball.
You can try to play the best ball that you need.
Everything according with the team necessity.
It means cannot be a high ball on the pin.
If you're.
Stronger high can be as fast as we can to have you hitting with a good efficiency and it can be good for our acting that we have to use during the game.
Okay.
So the center is like a waiters.
They're serving the plate that the, the heaters need.
The other one is the one they say, oh, this is my hot.
This is my shirt.
Go ahead.
It, I don't care who you are.
Okay.
So you can see clearly.
Okay.
So you can see clearly these two type of centers, and I was this like more likely waiters, try to add my heaters to, to have the best ball.
So, and so I'm teaching my centers that too.
Okay.
I think it's a plus for them to understand better the game.
So, uh, so we have to know where we're saying that the first point of the tactic and strategy start from knowing our center and know our set our self like centers.
So I know what I can or what I cannot do.
So for example.
I know how it was, you know, I like the ball wasn't going forward.
I was not opening the game back.
Everyone was going against the flow because different things.
My back was tough.
And so I was not opening a lot, but I found, you know, a strategy on the game that was working.
Okay.
So people know that, but the game I was in was still working.
I was trying to work on this ball back was on my basketball.
I, I started doing it just a little bit, but my main characteristic was the other one.
Okay.
I'm playing the short zone.
So, but I know how it was working.
So I knew that this is my characteristic.
And so I knew how the block was working against me.
So what, and what I could do in order to treat them if I want, I don't know, it makes sense.
So this is the first thing, this is the first thing we have to understand our center.
Now, the second thing about tactic and strategy is like, know your team, know your team and know your teammate.
Okay.
So the center has to have two characteristics, be empathic and be sympathetic, sympathetic because he has to feel, he has to feel and understand the other feeling and empathy.
He has to be able to stay in the shoes of the other player.
It means I'm a center.
You're just to be blocked.
Okay.
And then the second thing is how Mattias reacts on that.
So everyone is different.
You know, probably Mattias wants to have revenge.
And I need to say to him again, because I know he's ready.
And he needs to know I trust him.
If I'm not saying to you probably say, oh, he's not trusting anymore.
And you're like going down.
Someone else after being blocked or making a mistake is going to be too upset, too frustrated.
it and i know if i said it to him i'm not making me a favor actually he's doing worse
so and probably i need more time to put him on the game so i have to find different solution
okay or sometimes i know how matthias react i know that if you're like i show your eyes i i see your
anger it's like oh i need to set him again and the other game that you're not on the flu so
i see you and your eyes are low you're not watching me you're trying to wipe my eyes
i know i don't have to say to you even if sometimes i usually ask
so this is really important for the center is it something that you cannot teach it's super
hard to teach it's something that you had like personally obviously you can improve it but
if you start overthinking like i said that you're missing these little details
that can make a difference during the game okay so knowing your team and this is about
the personal thing you know characteristic personal characteristics stuff like that
but now we have all the game situation that we know okay this ball i know this type of ball with
matthias working but the other ball knows matthias really good in the outside he's struggling the
right side
so in order to eat him to the right side i have to be sure they put him in the best condition to
eat the ball i cannot stand to the right side to matthias if i have a bad pass in a bad moment he's
going to struggle okay so i have to create the condition to make in the best situation possible
so this is the second thing and now we have the the plan for the game so we start thinking about
the other side of the day
but i can start about the other side of the net just if i know what i'm doing in this side that's
why i was telling you i have to know myself any level i'm playing how i play so when i'm going to
plan my offense i have to try to predict what i'm going to do against me okay because the game is
like i know that they know that they know yeah so how are you gonna play it's a chess game so for me
the point is start with a plan okay but try to see if they start doing what you think they're doing
if they start committing with a middle or like committing with an outside
okay or probably they're not starting showing you how they're playing so they're waiting
to go into your priority at the end of the set so this is like the game that has to be in the
the other center so now you know we have to have plan a okay for me is like where i want to set
imagine now matthew is on fire uh he has the weakest block in front of him i want to play
with matthias now if you want to do that how do i have to manage the rest of the team so my
profits start every time from the middle even if you want to set to you to the outside okay
to in order to set that ball when i'm going to run my middle sometimes can be very far from where
i want to set sometimes can be very close or where i want to set okay it can be with the middle
blocker behind me because i know the middle is going with him and sometimes can be closer
to where i want to set to trick them with a gap shoot for example okay it's different according
to the situation of the game
what i see what i started okay and now this is my plan but in my head like a setter i just
cannot have plan a b c and d because you know something can happen matthias they're serving
short matthias die he cannot hit a ball what i'm going to do so i have to be ready for playing b
but the reality of the game told us it can be plan b cannot work as well sometimes i can
play c
a b
b
so the things that has to happen is like i have to be able to improvise i don't know if it's a word
improvise improvise improvise yeah i try okay to improvise so and this is a funny story because i
did a a course with university when i was a player about event management okay and one of the class
was improvised and the teacher was actually a theater actor and he started saying you know
there's nothing more planned than the improvisation it's like what are you saying it's like yes of
course you know it's like you're ready for that because you know something where it can happen
imagine you're making an event you're like you you're making an event outside
and rain you're not ready for that
of course so i was thinking gosh the saturday is the same i'm planning something but sometimes
all the cards are messed up so i have to change completely my plan so i have to be able to do
something that what i was expecting to do so that's why we're working during the practice
you know because to work on this type of situation so this is really really really
important and that's why recently i was thinking about that that saturday
you know i was thinking about that and i was thinking about that and i was thinking about
that it's really similar to change bt to ai you know but you know why because
you learn from your experience so as many as many data you're going to have
as better you can react to what is going to happen because obviously it took me by
improvising it's like it's exactly that you cannot decide before what to do but this thing
happened like one of the times in my career i'm ready i'm ready i'm gonna find a solution
probably not just one i'm gonna have three because like i tried so many times i failed so many times
that i'm failing giving me the right path the right direction to go for the next time
you know that's why being focused for kids for a younger player is so important during the game
and during the practice because you're building the experience not just on the tactic of the game
but also on the skill wise you're not thinking what i'm doing i'm not giving this information
to my brain this experience to be reused in the future or not reused because i avoid them to do
that you know that that's really really important
