===== SESSION: https://volleybrains.com/kevin-hambly/ =====

----- VIDEOS -----
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bVTpTTWQlMs
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xb_49KCtC7I
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fUH4MKdU0No
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YOglr8xLeek
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AhkviGh0YEs
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dpGULu576Zk
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mJonxUdO7hg
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=d1iX9qAlPk4
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mBt8dXnpuHY
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KPhlbATbk_4
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gueNEkYdyz4
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=V2xzS3RJJgE
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0RIMSpsaTFo
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rvTIK0h7Pyw
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IlMpT3l412M
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Q07RA6AcPGY
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0GfZR1UWMUM
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IlCnSxOTr_E
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jJpKLyf3NfE
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HFoOB6NJ6xc

----- TEXTO -----
51. Kevin Hambly: It's all about the players. It's all about them.

In this Masterclass we feature Kevin Hambly, the head coach of Stanford's women's volleyball team. Under Kevin, Stanford has won multiple conference titles and the NCAA Championship in 2018 and 2019. Under his leadership, 10 players became AVCA All-Americans.

Having been part of Team USA's coaching staff and having coached players toward pro careers, he also has a great insight into international volleyball's past and present.

Kevin goes over a lot in this Masterclass:

How he instills team culture at Stanford

How he stays ahead of the curve of where the game is going

What his biggest failures were and what he learned from them

His view on recruiting, past versus present

and so, so much more

17 edited and subtitled clips in this 7350-word Masterclass.

Enjoy!

Kevin, why did you decide to commit to being a volleyball coach? What pushed you towards that decision?

When I first knew I wanted to be a volleyball or a coach, period... was when I was 16 years old. I played basketball. And I was working a little clinic with 12, 13 year old boys. Teaching 'em how to shoot, teaching 'em how to play. And I just got hooked on teaching and watching people progress. I love that.

The reason I got into volleyball was, I decided late to not be a basketball player, because I knew I wanted to be a volleyball coach.

I chose the school that I wanted to play for very, very carefully. I wanted to make sure I was around a really good teacher and someone that I could learn the game from and was willing to take that on. And so I chose Carl McGown, who is regarded as one of the great trainers in the United States.

He was a motor learning professor, this is way before Gold Medal Squared, at that point, he was just a motor learning teacher. When he talked about teaching, it really resonated with me.

And I ended up coaching club right after my freshman year of college. I was coaching 16 and under as a freshman in college. So kids just two years younger than me, and I even ended up playing with a couple of those guys in college.

So right away, once I had an opportunity to start coaching, I started to get reps.

I started to go out to as many camps and clinics as I could, and I started to get reps.

I kind of knew, kind of inherently, that that's just what I wanted the minute I hit college as an 18 year old.

I started to play pro, but once I got into it, it didn't have as much value to me like teaching and coaching did.

Having played on a collegiate team, the professional ranks just seemed like everyone was out for themselves. And that just didn't resonate with me. I wanted to kind of get back to coaching. So I turned down a contract in Argentina. Started coaching at 23 years old, and I've gotten a paycheck from coaching volleyball ever since.

So coaching little kids is what set it off. But then the more I got into it, the more I loved it.

My motivations for coaching have changed, obviously. But that's why I got into it.

What advice would you give yourself as a starting coach? An advice that is so clear and logic for you now, but that you had to develop over the years.

This is never about you. This coaching profession is never about you.

I think when I was young, my identity as a coach was wrapped up in the performance of the players. If the team was not doing well, that meant I was not doing well.

And the problem with that is then: my response to them not performing well was about fight or flight.

There's some players that I coached when I was young that I, every time I see 'em, I still apologize because my behavior wasn't okay.

I was trying to control them instead of guiding them. Instead of inspiring them. Instead of creating a level of collaboration.

And I am not embarrassed to admit it, because I think a lot of coaches go through that. But I'm embarrassed of those times because I think, I knew nothing about what I was doing.

A lot of coaches say that  same thing. Then the next question is of course. When did it click?

I think one of the things I have been pretty good about. It's hard to say this. But I think a part is self-reflection. Not just self-reflection, but like, Hey, are you doing a good job?

And never feeling like I am a complete product. That I still have more to learn. And still need to learn from every season, every moment.

I'll go back and watch this conversation even to see if I can be better at communicating.

I'm just constantly trying to be better.

So I think I was pretty good about that even early. I just paid attention to what was going on and how the team was responding. And if they weren't responding how I wanted, why was that? I started evaluating my own behaviors.

But when it really clicked, was when I was with the USA women's team.

When I was with the team from 2001 to 2004. You're traveling and you're talking to the athletes. Talking to 'em about their college experience.

Cause I had a feeling that I wanted to get back into that and not go professional. I liked that age group a lot.

So I was curious what their experiences were like. And what they liked and disliked.

Many of 'em just felt like it was about the coaches. Many of 'em felt like they were being used up. That they were just a product. That it was very transactional.

They're players of the year, all Americans. And they're pretty miserable in their whole time in college.

And I'm like, we can do this better. I can figure this out. I can solve this.

So I just asked 'em a million questions about what they liked and didn't like. And then from there I really started to, in my mind, shape who I wanted to be. Especially as a collegiate university head coach.

But that was what kind of shaped my coaching philosophy at that point.

I'm not sure it was that solidified. But at least the concepts of what and how I wanted to approach coaching.

What are bad recommendations you hear about coaching or training volleyball?

I think what's really interesting to me is that there's people that are teaching things because they were told "this is how it should be taught".

But they've never actually looked at it. And paid attention to actually are the top players doing these things?

They went to some clinic or they heard some coach talk about it and this guy has taught it because he's heard it. And historically that's just been passed down. And they've never really evaluated that. They never even watched the top players.

And a lot of 'em will even reference, this is what the top players in the world are doing.

And they'll tell me that. And I'm like, are you watching the top players in the world? I see them doing nothing like what you're talking about. I see quite the opposite in some cases.

You need to reflect on the game and put time in to pay attention to what the top players are doing. What are the innovations in the game. Where's the game moving.

The techniques have evolved because the game's evolved. I think passing's changed a lot. Serving's obviously changed a lot. I think blocking and out of system offense has been drastically changed in the last 10 years.

But I hear people talk about the game and they're still saying the same things that were said 20 years ago. And referencing it, like it's what the top players in the world do.

So I think that's a dangerous way to go about it.

Or there's things that they're teaching that they've heard that are not even bio-mechanically sound, that are actually dangerous for athletes.

Dangerous, that they're gonna have overuse injuries. I heard one coach say, "drive your elbow up like this". And anyone that understands arm swing mechanics knows if your scapula comes off your spine like that, that you're putting your shoulder at risk.

But there's still people that are teaching that. And that's being passed around without a question, without a thought. Because I heard this coach who's supposed to be this very good coach in this area, or this college or this, whatever, say this.

And they've never questioned it. Because I'm not gonna challenge authority.

So I don't know if that's exactly what you're asking, but that's something that frustrates me or bothers me a great deal.

Do you have a particular goal? Maybe a goal that you already reached or a goal that is so hard to reach that it gives you daily motivation?

I guess I have two kind of goals.

One is with whatever time I have left in the sport, I wanna make sure that I'm continuing to grow and learn and ask the right questions.

These are lame goals. Cause I'm where I want to be for my professional life. This is the highest level that I want to coach. I had some opportunities to coach professional and international. I'm good. I like the university. This suits me, fits who I am.

Of course every year I wanna try to win titles. But I wouldn't say I'm gonna define my success that way.

I think I'm gonna define my success in, am I gonna always be trying to learn and grow and question and push.

I just wanna make sure that when I wake up in the morning... am I doing everything to keep growing and try to get better?

So that's the one thing. And then after that. That I wanna stay in the game and I want to teach coaches. I wanna help coaches. I wanna help coaches have healthy relationships with their players. And that they have a healthy relationship with the sport themselves.

Take the things that I've learned, I think I have a very, very healthy relationship with the sport, and help coaches, especially young coaches find that same thing and go down that path.

I'm 50 here this year. So I have a few more years in this thing. I have quite a few. But those are my two goals.

I don't have any, I wanna coach in the Olympics. I wanna win a gold medal. That stuff's kind of passed for me.

It's more of win as many titles as I can right now. Treat the athletes the right way. Keep growing. And then give back to a lot of coaches and help them have a healthy relationship.

Because so many of 'em don't, and so many of 'em get out of their sport. At least in the United States because they don't have a healthy relationship either with their players or with the sport itself.

I talked to Dan Friend last summer, and he told me that he's always texting you regarding books to read. Dan also gave us some great insights into how he goes about making his freshmen get comfortable as soon as possible. How do you go about that in Stanford?

So there's several relationships we're talking about. As players get integrated into the program, they're 18 years old. Most of 'em have not spent much time with players, especially in our system, that are older or younger than them.

In high school, maybe a little bit, but usually they're the stars and they're kind of propped up.

Most of 'em have not had a real relationship with adults. People my age, like old people like me. They've had their parents and maybe their uncles and all that.

But that's very different than a coach or a boss. So they haven't had that.

But also the difference between a 22 year old and an 18 year old is pretty vast. Especially between the ones that have had some college experience and the others.

And so a couple of the things that we do is as the players come together early on in the season, we take the freshmen and the seniors and we make 'em go have a dinner together.

We say, Hey, here's some per diem, here's some money. You guys go have a dinner together. And here's the rules. You have to sit across from each other. So you have to look at each other. There can be no TVs, no phones, and you have to stay there for an hour. And you have to talk.

And the reason we do it that way is because when you're there for an hour, the first 15 minutes is kinda like, this is my wife and kids. And here's my life. And here's where I'm from. And here's what my school was like. Here's the music I like.

And then there's awkward silence, right.

And in that awkward silence, then they start to talk about other things. And they start to actually get to know each other. They start to get to know them as a person a little bit.

And the players have loved that. And then we just rotate everyone around. So even the juniors and the sophomores, we hook them up and they're connected to the seniors. We cycle 'em all through.

And then for me, I think the one thing I'm not very good at is getting my assistants connected like this, I probably should do that more.

I really worry much more about my relationship with the players. Probably that's something that I probably should need to evaluate as I'm talking about this.

But I do the same thing. We sit down for about 45 minutes. No phones, we sit out, no TVs. It's just the two of us. And honestly, I just try to listen to them a lot.

I try not to talk very much. I ask questions, ask probing questions. I'm a pretty active listener and I just want them to be heard. And to be honest, when they're freshmen, they're terrible. They don't know what to say. They don't know what to do. They're very anxious. They think I'm judging 'em for everything.

And I'm just assuring them, Hey, look, I want to just get to know you.

By the time they're juniors, seniors, it's like I'm talking to an old friend. We're not friends. But the conversations are easy because we've been able to build that trust up.

That's a way to build that trust and develop those relationships.

Once you get to know 'em, then I can coach 'em the way that they need to be coached.

And a big thing here is connecting them to all the resources on campus to help them have the best collegiate experience possible.

On the book side of it. One of the things that I think is really powerful is shared experiences. Obviously a season is a shared experience, right. A trip is a shared experience. Even like a road trip, you have this shared experience and you guys have all been through it. And when you leave players at home, you feel the difference, the connection is missing.

But a book, for me, a book is a way to start that up a little bit with the whole group. And so that's one of the reasons why I have our teams read so many books. We read 'em together and then we talk about it.

And I always feel like at the end of that, we understand each other a whole lot more. And it kind of forces our hand to have this shared experience. To get to know each other. How each other thinks. How we communicate. Who the leaders are. A lot of things that come from that are just really, really powerful and help guide me to guide the team.

All those things are ways to kind of bring the group together.

But at the end of the day, it's more about how do we get to know each other.

The most important thing is how do we get to know each other. How do we understand each other. How do we develop a level of empathy for each other.

So that we can work together most efficiently.

The future of volleyball, from a technical point of view, how will the game evolve according to your opinion?

We're lagging just behind the men's game.

Back row attacking in the women's game at the collegiate level was not a big deal. Even just five years ago. The two best, most efficient back row attackers that were on teams that were relevant to the NCAA titles, the top 16 teams, were two players that hit above .200. That's it. This was in 2018, actually not that long ago.

One was Kathryn Plummer and she hit .265 and she was the best one, at least in the stuff that we looked at. And the second one was Mikaela Foecke, who was a first team all American and who played in Nebraska and she was hitting .228 or something like that. Don't quote me on the number.

This year. Kendall Kip, our opposite, was hitting over .400 on the bic on an in system ball. She was hitting .300 on the D.

Sidney Fields. Same thing, same numbers. The game is just evolving where the back row is getting more evolved.

And the men's game has really evolved that way.  The bic is getting faster and it's an actual play. It's starting to move around in different places instead of just the middle of the court. You're seeing that evolution happen.

So if you follow the trends of what's happening in the men's game, you'll see some of the things that we're trying to implement. We're trying to get ahead of it.

I think one of the things that we did in 17, 18, 19 with the group that I had was we came out and started being way more aggressive from the service line.

I think a few other people were doing the same. Nebraska was on the same page.

We don't have the jump topspin serve where people are just blasting like in the men's game. But the aggressiveness of the serves have gotten more aggressive.

Early on I thought we were one of four or five teams that was serving very, very aggressive. Now it feels like the whole country's serving very aggressive.

I think we're gonna play tighter and more inside out of system.

We're gonna be more aggressive with that. We're gonna play faster. We're gonna play in more spots along the net and in the back court. We're gonna try to create more gaps. Which means that the defense will respond. There's a lot of teams like us that are playing in a read type system where we can stand in a tight read system and then go chase.

So we're gonna have to make some choices. We're gonna have to get outta that. Because the game's gonna speed up. We're gonna have to move around.

Out of system, we're gonna have to be good with our open hands and jamming and tipping and wiping and those kind of things.

Setting, we're gonna have to be more aggressive. And play in that space. I think that's kind of where I see it heading. Some teams are starting to head there.

There's so much video now, we can watch the men's game, where it was hard to find before. We can watch where the game's evolving.

We're able to pick up on this stuff sooner. And we're teaching it now. Coaches are teaching it now and trying to catch up.

That lag is getting shorter and shorter behind the men's game. But there is still a lag.

We're not on the cusp or the edge of innovation. We're more following the innovation.

According to you, what rule change is necessary? And why would you want to see this rule implemented?

I don't think about this too much. Rule changes are not something that I'm spending my time on. Tell me what they are and then I'll figure out how to be the best we can in it.

But one of the things that I'd like to see is just the double contact go completely away. On the second contacts it needs to just go completely away. International, it's a lot looser. But at the collegiate game, they're calling it very, very tight. And I think that I'd love to see that just disappear.

The open hand tip. The open hand probably would be best if we got rid of that as well. If we wanna extend rallies. If the goal is to make it that we can extend rallies more, and we want to please the fans.

Just make it more interesting, have it be like beach where it's a knuckle or you can roll it or you have to hit it to make plays.

The ability to hit with range, both around the court and with depth, it just makes it almost impossible at the highest levels to defend on a perfect set. So it'd be fun to see what the game would look like without that open hand tip.

Some other ideas that would might be interesting is the idea of you get to rally and when you get to 20 or something the score freezes and you have to earn the rest of it.

I think that would make the game a little bit interesting. The problem with that is that it would become hard to be televised as the game could just go on and on.

But first one to 20, the score is frozen and you have to earn it from the service line, I would want to see someone experiment with that.

I feel like teams maybe would back off their serves a little bit. And we get a chance to score some points. It's not a race to 25 anymore. That potentially could kind of clean up, especially on the men's side, some of the service stuff.

But that's about all I got on those. I don't spend a lot of time on it. Those thoughts are kind of half baked ideas.

Well not the double contact, but the other ones are kind of half baked ideas. But that's what I see that maybe could have some influence on what's going on.

Make the game a little bit more watchable, to your point earlier, it's hard to watch at times because of all the errors. And how easy it is to score at times. Maybe make it a little bit more palatable.

Best game you've ever seen. What recent or game from the volleyball vaults did validate once more that volleyball is the greatest sport on the globe

The best match I've ever seen. That was the gold medal match with Russia and Brazil in 2008. When Russia moved their middle to the opposite.

I thought that the amount of courage that that took for the head coach of Russia in that moment, in that match was just inspiring to be honest. I have that one on my computer all the time. I will go back and just watch that. And it's interesting to watch now how the game has evolved even from then.

But the favorite match that I ever coached in was the World Championships in 2002. USA versus Russia. It was a battle. They had Artamonova, they had Godina. We had Keba Fibbs, Danielle Scott and Tayyiba Haneef.

And it was just a battle. And both teams were playing their best. They were just both at the top. That was one of the most fun matches I've ever been a part of.

My favorite match, no one will know about, because this was the one that has the most meaning for me as a coach.

When I was at University of Illinois, we were trying to build a program. We went to Texas. Second weekend I think, or third weekend. And we were kind of "The Little Engine That Could".

We were this little team, this program that was trying to become real. We went into Texas and beat 'em in three.

All of a sudden there was a paradigm shift that happened with our team, about the program and the perception of us.

Even including our athletes were like, okay, they were number one or two and we were nine or 10. But all of a sudden we're legit.

Without that match we wouldn't have had our chance to go to the final. We wouldn't have had our chance to make the runs that we did later on.

Those are three matches that come to mind.

In preparation of this article, I read that you were able to do the impossible on the recruiting side of things over in Illinois. Can you give an insight into what was meant with that?

That's really hard for me to answer. This is not tooting my own horn, but objectively. Well these are subjective things, because we have the recruiting rankings.

So recruiting rankings, if those have any meaning at all, before we got to Illinois, there were no classes that were top 10 classes. And then during our time, we had lots of top 10 classes. And we had the number one class with Jordan Poulter.

I think I've been perceived as a good recruiter.

To me recruiting is very simple. Don't be a douchebag. Treat the kids like people. And share a vision and hope they buy into it. And be brutally honest.

That's all we've done. It's not complicated to me. And I think that's what everyone's trying to do. And so I don't know why that's the case.

I don't know why we've had been able to recruit. I think recruiting at Stanford is very different than recruiting at Illinois.

There is the piece of identifying talent. And especially identifying it early. A kid like Michelle Bartsch, we thought was amazing. I thought she was an amazing player in club. And she wasn't that heavily recruited by everyone.

So there is some evaluation to be done, that's correct. Trying to kind of see or have a vision for where you think you could take players.

But the whole getting kids onto your campus and convincing that this is what they want to do, doesn't seem all that complicated to me. It just seems like a lot of coaches screw it up.

It just jumped out to me because once you are Stanford and once you're Illinois and you had a couple of good years, it becomes easier. But to make that jump that's more difficult. So there had to be something. That's why I asked the question.

We also have to get a little lucky. You have to be a little lucky, right.

Michelle Bartsch could have not worked out. And then we had an outside Laura DeBruler, who's 5-11, as an outside. She jumped really well. People wanted her to be a defensive specialist. We convinced her to be an outside. Because we liked her game and she had a great arm. And she ended up being a first team all American. She hit .315 in the Big 10, which is a really good defensive conference.

We got lucky, those kids actually worked out. And they were the right kind of kids. It wasn't all luck.

They were the right kind of kids. They wanted to be good.

I thought we did a pretty good job of teaching 'em and helping 'em grow.

All those things have to come together. But there's still some luck in all this.

If you can make the strongest 'starting six' in the world, right now. What would your team look like? Why did you choose these players?

This is a hard question. I wish I'd known. Where do I start with this? Outsides is easy. I'll go women.

I would say Logan Tom would be my outside in the two position. She's just the best volleyball player that I've ever seen. The decisions she made. She doesn't have the biggest arm, but she's a very good athlete. She's a great passer, good server, all those things. But just talking about the winning plays, I mean, she's the best volleyball player.

She scored in places you shouldn't score, in the one time you could score there.

There was an instance where we're playing Russia. And they played middle person up. They had someone behind the net for a tip. And we're playing and we set her outside and she tips and scores. And I'm charting, I'm on the bench.

And I'm like, how did she score? I go back, I looked at all our swings. The one time they weren't in that defense was the one time she tipped.

It was not like she saw it and then the next time she did it. No, it was in that moment she saw it and did it. I've never seen anything like it.

So Logan Tom outside along with, I'm gonna go older because I know that international game better. Artamonova, no, I'm gonna go even older.

Mireya Luis, when it mattered the most, Mireya Luis was at her best. And she was fun to watch play as well. If it was a big swing, every time I watched her at least, she never failed. You could say the same about Flo Hyman. And you could say the same about Lang Ping probably. But Mireya Luis and Logan Tom, that'd be a fun combination on the outside.

Opposite. Man, that's hard. I'm gonna say Haak. Right now watching her play, she's the player I watch the most. The things that she does and the choices she makes. I'm just thoroughly impressed all the time. And I think there's other athletes that are more physical. Like Boskovic and Egonu. But just the way Haak plays, I love watching her play.

Fernandinha (Venturini), the setter from Brazil back in the day. The way that she manipulated the block and the defense. She was incredible. She was my favorite setter that I've ever seen play.

Middles are tough. I love middles, so this is really hard. I'm gonna say Danielle Scott. The things she did, I saw her take over games. And then I'll say Regla Torres just because she was a beast. I had to scout against her and she was so incredibly physical. And the same kind of thing when it mattered, she was really good.

I can't remember the name of the Brazilian libero. That was there for the last 12 years.  I can't remember her name. But she was the best libero I saw.

This is a hard question. I'm regretting five of these already. I'm already thinking through players. But it is what it is. I'm okay with it.

If you could have a gigantic billboard anywhere with anything on it — metaphorically speaking, getting a message out to every athlete on the globe — what would it say and why?

I think I would want it to say: Volleyball is what you do, not who you are. And that your identity isn't a volleyball player. Your identity is whoever you are. And do everything you can to make sure that those are uncoupled.

Because if you're coupling it and it goes bad, if you're going bad as a player, then you're not okay.

If you wanna make the mistakes necessary to grow, it's hard, because you'll feel bad about yourself, because you're making those errors.

I just would want to do everything I can and do everything I can to uncouple those two things.

I guess you would give exactly the same advice to the coaches out there, right?

A hundred percent. I'd give the same advice to housewives. I'd give the same advice to CEOs. I think there's so much in this world that we're trying to couple together for our identity.

And it seems like a very dangerous practice. At least in the United States, especially with the Instagrams and all those kind of things, that's all people are doing. Trying to create some kind of brand, even if they have nothing to sell. And so I think they're just coupling those things all the time. It just seems very, very unhealthy to me.

When  at the start of our conversation I talked about what I learned when I was young. Well it was because it was coupled.

And I did things and said things that I wish I didn't say.  Because it was coupled. Not because I was outta control. It was because we weren't doing well, and so I wasn't doing well.

The more I believe that this is an important thing to talk to athletes about, to talk to camp kids, about to talk to my own kids about.

The more I see how broad and how important it is.

What is an unusual habit or an absurd thing that you love doing?

I've done everything I can to not be superstitious. If I find myself doing certain routines, I break 'em up. I don't really have anything like that.

I have a guitar in my office. And on game days, I'll sit and play my guitar as a kind of a before the match ritual. I'll go over the game plan and all that stuff.

And if I'm at home, I'll do the same. I kind of have guitars just laying around. And I suck at guitar, so it's not like I'm jamming out and playing these great songs.

But that's kind of my stress relief, that's where I solidify my ideas. How I think through things. Make sure I'm ready. Kind of a Zen moment. Just by grabbing the guitar and playing horrible nineties songs.

How has a failure, or apparent failure, set you up for later success? Do you have a “favorite failure” of yours?

Oh, man. Okay. I have a couple of these. The first one is as an athlete.

It was little kid football. It's called Pop Warner football. I played football as a kid since I was six years old and I was the kicker.

We were playing the number one team in the state and it was the semi-finals or quarter finals. I don't remember the exact details, but it was the playoffs. It was a big deal.

When you score a touchdown at little kid football, it's hard to kick field goals because you're just little. I was pretty good at that. I never missed, but I missed the one that I'm gonna describe here.

The other team scored early. They ran it in. So if you run it in, you get one point. Which is the opposite of older football. They get one point. If you kick it, you get two.

So we score a touchdown in the fourth quarter. It's this long battle, this defensive struggle. We score a field goal and the score is six seven and it's my turn to kick.

I still have not missed an extra point in my entire life. And I went to kick it. I was nervous and my leg was shaking. And it stuck to my foot. The ball flipped up somewhere in the air and hit the crossbar and fell. And I just collapsed crying. And my team was angry but at the same time trying to console me.

In that moment, a couple things happened.

First off, I decided that I never wanted something like that to happen again, obviously. Right? I am not gonna let that happen again.

And the second thing that happened is that two hours later, it didn't matter anymore. It didn't change a thing. If we would've won, it didn't change. It didn't matter. I wanted it because I wanted it for my team.

I did let my team down, but I'm gonna be okay. It was upsetting., but I went home, we were playing with my brothers and it's gone.

Already at that young of an age, seven, eight years old, I started to develop a healthy relationship with the sport.

I'm gonna be incredibly competitive and I'm gonna fight and I'm gonna do everything. And I'm gonna hang onto it for a little while. But man, it's not gonna define me. It's not gonna define me.

Even at that age, I was having those thoughts.

So that's one of the most important failures I've had.

The other one was in 2017 when I took over here. We had a team that could win it. And I was not being myself as a coach. The team won the title the year before, and I took over.

And they had not all the same players, we had quite a bit of turnover. But still had the nucleus that could win.

I was new to the job and I was not being me. I was trying to hang onto the traditions of what Stanford was. I was trying to compromise some things that I saw. Behaviors I saw. Because it had worked for them in the past and there was pushback. I didn't believe in the way that they were doing it. But I kinda let it still happen.

And we failed. And probably missed a chance to hang another banner, win another title.

And after that I just decided that no matter what, I'm always gonna be me. I'm always gonna do the things that I think are important. And got the group on the page. And then we were able to take things in the right direction. But it was a really good lesson.

Even for someone that has been coaching for over 20 years at that point. And still make that mistake. It was a good reminder.

Those are two very opposite ends of my career, but both very important.

Do you have a book that you like a lot? Maybe books that you share with your team?

There's two. One of the things that I like to dive into with individuals and groups is values. Core values. And "Man's Search for Meaning" is a great way to start that process.

I love that book. Every team that I've ever had reads it. It's a hard read. There's some awful things in it, obviously, it's about the holocaust, especially the first half of it. That book has been really important.

And then the other one for teams is "Five Dysfunctions of Teams". It's just a book that had a huge impact on me. And had a huge impact on many of my teams.

I think every team that we've ever read it with, it's shaped the way that we communicate.

I'll give one more. It's called "Four Agreements" and it's about a good way to live life. There's a couple things in there that are obvious but so important. Be impeccable with your word. Don't take things personal. Do your best. Some of these things, especially don't take things personal, are pretty powerful concepts that seem very simple at first.

But as you start to process them, well they've helped shape the way that I've wanted to live my life.

Which behavior, or habit has most improved your life?

I make the best effort I possibly can to be present wherever I am. To be exactly scheduled. So that wherever I am, I'm present.

If I'm at home, I'm present. If I'm with an athlete, I'm present. If I'm on practice, I'm present. Just making sure that I am there.

I think that's been the most important thing that I've learned for sure. And the most important habit that I've developed. I was terrible at it when I was young. And it helps me develop meaningful relationships with my athletes.

It helps us be more efficient when I'm coaching. I'm a dad, when I'm home, I'm with them. I do everything I can to be with them and being 'actually' with them.

I'm there with my wife, we can talk through things and I'm not distracted. I think that has been incredibly important.

When you feel overwhelmed or unfocused, or have lost your focus temporarily, what do you do? What questions do you ask yourself?

If my team is struggling the two things that I remind myself of are:

The first thing is, it's only volleyball. This is only volleyball, it's okay.

Which maybe might piss some people off, because they make it bigger than that. But it is, it's just volleyball.

And then the second thing is. It's about them, meaning the players. It's not about you. If you think you're hurting, they're hurting way more.

And they're the ones that are out there dealing with all this. How can you help them? And that's kind of where I go.

How can I help them deal with this and get through it. Even beyond the training stuff. And have the conversation.

So those are the two things, when the team is struggling and that's happening. That's kind of where I go.

Thank you, Kevin

Extra clip:

I had just reviewed a couple of coaching clinics and it raised the question to me about the different ways of 'instruction' there exist.

Are we coaching players to help them move better OR are we making up concepts and frameworks that "help" coaches coach, but are maybe less helpful for the player?

That was a bit of the thought exercise. In this case I'm trying to make the case 'against' counting steps in complex movements. Check out the clip below.

Outside of outright bad recommendations a lot of stuff isn't black or white in coaching, that 'grey zone expertise' is what you'll get with experience and having an open mind. (patting myself on the back for making that one up ;-))

In an upcoming Masterclass with Jim McLaughlin we'll go over this exact question. We happened to talk about the same thing with Kevin so it's cool to insert Kevin's thoughts on this.



