===== SESSION: https://volleybrains.com/julio-velasco/ =====

----- VIDEOS -----
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=B4m6ciUDAKw
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1OMoBvyi1BE
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lp6yCjDdxho
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nCkj4ncBM38
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IlGLnLeINGA
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=O1Cyh3yeE74
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mkQjNVuJYVQ
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pVmVrwUHu70
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1QLiICPu5GQ
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=F5XDhyrgAeE

----- TEXTO -----
53. Julio Velasco: This is an art.

Julio Velasco is a legendary figure in the world of volleyball. Over the years Julio had many roles in international volleyball, from coaching Italian top teams, the Italian phenomenal 90's National team and other world class national teams.

Julio currently serves as the sports director for the Italian Volleyball Federation. (You'll read about his future objectives inside this Masterclass)

His innovative training methods and tactical genius have set him apart as one of the most influential coaches in sports. In ANY sport. Julio was inducted into the Volleyball Hall of Fame in 2005.

In this Masterclass article, we're honored to feature Velasco's insights on leadership and coaching. Whether you're a volleyball coach, player, or simply a fan of the sport, Velasco's wealth of experience and expertise is sure to inspire and enlighten.

This is part 1 of 2. Part 2 will be featured next weekend.

Enter Julio.

Julio, why did you decide to commit to being a professional volleyball coach? What pushed you towards that decision?

I became a coach somewhat by accident. I was a university student majoring in philosophy. I didn't want to be a researcher; I wanted to be a teacher.

I also participated actively in the student movement against a military government of ours. In Argentina, there have been numerous different military governments.

After that, democratic elections were held. Then there was another military coup, and there I had already lost my job. I was working in a high school and I also studied at the university.

I had to start doing a little bit of everything, including cleaning in a bank while employed by a cleaning service.

And since I had always played volleyball before, I also took a coaching course. I really enjoyed it.

My first coach was a significant figure in my life, who made a lasting mark on me. An impression that has stayed with me to this day.

A club gave me a kids team with players to still fully develop. This wasn't in a club where I had played but in another club. In Argentina we have all these multi-sport clubs, and it happens to be that I was a soccer fan of this club.

I started out together with Raul Lozano, by the way.

The following year, I moved to Buenos Aires, because the circumstances in my city were intolerable. They were extremely risky for me.

And I continued coaching in a smaller club in Buenos Aires. While I was doing other things. Where I could, I was also teaching a little bit of everything. Speed reading, study methods, and the like.

The following year, a larger club hired me.

There I went to train kids in the summer. You know these activities in the summer where parents can send their children there during the day.

And in 1979 I made the decision to study physical education and devote myself entirely to it. All this of course without considering the possibility of becoming a coach in Italy or elsewhere.

I was only considering working in a gym or doing that summer project. Because it was too difficult to find a good teaching job. I just coached my volleyball team.

A year later I went to another important club where I coached another team of kids and teenagers.

All of this began in the year 1977, but I had already decided to become a pro while coaching in 1979.

I wanted to try to make a living off of volleyball.

I completed this physical education course when I was 27 years old. The course in and of itself was a bit awkward also because my classmates were between the ages of 18 and 19.

But I decided to go for it, believing that having this diploma would be beneficial. That it would open up some opportunities, such as becoming a physical preparation coach.

I already had a child to support, so I had a family to care for.

Years later, they called to ask me to be the assistant coach for the Argentina national team as well as being their physical preparation coach. So maybe they wouldn't have called if I didn't have the two diploma's?

And all that paved the way for me to get to Italy.

So it all was a bit of a coincidence. However, I made that decision at a specific time. I devoted myself to it because I enjoyed doing it. I enjoyed teaching a lot.

I simply changed the topic (from psychology to volleyball) of what I wanted to teach.

But I made that decision right there.

In Argentina, you could coach children and be a professional. You could survive on that. We have an extremely well-developed youth system.

It was a very simple life.

But we could survive on that.

Maybe good to dive deeper in the structure of Argentinian sports. These 'polisportivi' or multi-sports clubs had an incentive to take care of developing youth teams, right?

We didn't have a national league back then.

It was the league of Buenos Aires and its environment, including La Plata, my hometown.

This federation's president, which was the federation with the most clubs and players, had instilled a rule.

He made it a requirement for every senior team to have a youth team.

The amount of youth teams increased depending on the level at which your first team competed. We competed in the fourth category, so we only needed one youth team.

That is why there were coaches who would go out to find children to join these teams. They couldn't play otherwise. So that's how I began as well.

You played in the Serie A? Okay, you needed every youth team in every category. There was no fine to be paid if you did not have these teams.

You simply had to have them.

So a mechanism was devised in which you had to go find players. Because you couldn't play in Serie A if they weren't there.

This significantly increased the number of practitioners and it also placed a high value on the youth coach.

Because if he doesn't find any players, those on the first team were unable to play at all.

As a result, we were properly compensated. It wasn't a large sum of money. But certainly not like in Italy, where youth coaches are underpaid.

It was a good wage, you could live on it. You could get by if your wife also worked.

Everything began with that single decision.

And until today in Argentina, every Sunday morning at 9:00 a.m., the youngest children begin to play. The seniors play at 13:00. In between, all age groups compete.

As a result, it becomes a big event, with all of the players and parents present.

There is a lot of youth activity.

If you have that 'rule' even for a short period, the effects will be felt for many years to come. Coaches get more recognition, they know they need to improve their own skillsets. Very interesting.

People were saying at the time that many clubs would close as a result of this requirement.

That, however, was not the case. In fact, it provided a significant boost.

And it's one of the reasons that there are many excellent Argentinian coaches in the world.

Some were players, such as Castellani. Others, however, have been formed in the same way that I was.

Like Lozano, Cichello, and many others.

They coached youth teams before moving on to coach a Serie A team.

What advice would you give yourself as a starting coach? An advice that is so clear and logic for you now, but that you had to develop over the years.

The first is related to what you said to me earlier.

When you first begin coaching, a former player must kill the player who lives within them. Of course, you should retain all of your knowledge.

However, your persona as a player. You must eliminate that.

If you don't, you'll make the same mistakes I did in my first year of coaching. I'm talking about training adults. Fortunately, I didn't make the same mistake when it came to teaching children.

What exactly do I mean by that? "Hey, let me show you how it's done."

I entered the court and demonstrated how 'easy' everything was.

I shouldn't have done that because I wasn't coaching Serie A players at the time. I was coaching in a lower division. But I pretended it was Serie A.

The greater the former player, the greater the risk of failing to recognize the difficulties that others face.

Of being unclear to your players. It's not clear to them. It's just obvious to you because you have all that experience.

The second point is.

That a coach must conceptualize everything that appears to be self-evident.

When something becomes overly obvious due to your experience "spike in this direction, watch the block, and do that." Well, that is not the way to educate.

Conceptualise. Develop a specific thought process. Create a method for teaching, a method for instructing.

These are the first two points I wanted to mention.

Master the art of explaining things in the fewest words possible.

We of course have to talk about 'la cultura degli alibi'.

As with everything else, people synthesize their personal experiences. From their daily lives, sports, and studies.

You can't always remember where you picked something up.

Let us say that Argentina and Italy have very similar cultures, they both have that ingrained 'alibi culture'.

And alibis aren't just about what you can and cannot control. Because there are alibis that are more general or even cultural in nature.

"You can't do that in this country because we're not used to it."

But there's also the alibi of education. That is referred to as 'cognitive dissonance' in psychology.

When the mind refuses to accept a contradiction, when there is only one solution to a problem. One of the two contradictory things must be eliminated by the brain.

Or the person changes on their own. As children do when learning to use a computer or their cellphones.

They learn so quickly because they are aware that they have made a mistake. They press the button, but nothing happens. No child will claim that the computer or cell phone made an error.

As a result, they learn and adapt quickly.

When we enter into interpersonal relationships it all gets a bit more messy.

For example, at school. Your kid tells you that the professor is picking on them. It wasn't them who made the mistake.

Or 'my mom doesn't understand me'. So they won't change behaviour, they found an alibi, an excuse.

They resolve it by refusing to change and blaming the other person. This mechanism must be dismantled.

It's true that mom isn't always correct. We would still be living in the twentieth century if parents were always correct, there would have been little progress.

The dynamic will always be: Should I make a change or not?

We must teach our children how to recognize these things. When they should and when they should not change.

This applies to everything.

I recall my daughter telling me once. She, of course, knows me the best and knows that I always gave the teacher the benefit of the doubt rather than her.

Because it wouldn't help her whether or not the teacher was right or not. One time she added, "No, but this time it's true, the teacher is really picking on me"

"I really believe you," I said.

But you must be prepared for this. Because you'll be going to work tomorrow and will have a boss, or you could be at university or be wherever you're going.

Your manager or boss maybe isn't the best person to be around but you must deal with that situation.

Will you just leave right away? No right?

That is what you are currently training for. I believe you when you say they are picking on you.

But you must solve the problem on your own.

Of course, there is a balance to this. Don't exaggerate either.

When you are missing four of your starting players, the coach feels he can't talk about it because it will look like an 'alibi'...

That is not an alibi. You're missing more than half of your team. That isn't even close to an alibi.

It all comes down to that one mechanism.

To not stifle the 'opportunity of change' when it is a so-called unsolvable error or when the problem is caused by someone else.

This is a mechanism that prevents you from growing and improving.

Real learning takes place while working on or through the root of the problem.

This has been the case since the dawn of time. Man made fire because it was cold outside and they wanted to cook. It always begins with a problem.

It is never the result of a "non-problem." A non-problem does not result in progress. The problem generates progress. Difficulties result in progress.

As a result, we must foster that culture as well.

Which, of course, doesn't mean that we can't accept any explanation anymore. We also don't need to become "alibi fundamentalists."

You must have prior experience of course to determine whether or not we're talking about an alibi. So it isn't easy to judge when you are young or inexperienced because the only thing you're lacking is that valuable experience.

It is also important to make people believe that the error isn't proof of their inability.

The error is an essential part of the learning process.

Everyone has accidentally pressed the wrong button on their phone. I tell the players and our young people about it all the time, you can't learn unless you make mistakes.

It is impossible to learn without making mistakes.

The fact that the error is always obvious is a major issue in volleyball. In soccer, if you hit the crossbar, you will receive a standing ovation. Hitting a centimeter outside the court in volleyball, you may lose the set. The same goes for Tennis.

So, yes, you must teach people not to make mistakes.

However, without demonizing the error.

Because you'll put people on the spot and they will become fearful when executing. When players make mistakes, I see many coaches exaggerate.

They believe that teaching people not to make mistakes is important.

They believe that to teach people not to make mistakes, they have to tell them: 'Hey, don't make the mistake'. That would be too easy.

When a coach talks too much about errors they're just creating fearful players.

You did a few corporate speeches regarding '10 points' or suggestions to be implemented by leaders. A journalist mentioned the absence of slides when you give a speech, as that would create a second 'signal' which would take away from your actual message.

In the next article, next week, we'll translate and add these '10 points'

For me there are two kinds of speeches. One is a more technical one.

When I'm teaching volleyball coaches, of course I'm using slides and images.

But when I'm invited to give an hour or a 90 minutes long speech to a group of managers. You need to bring them into a dialogue, even though it's just me talking.

I have also done these with smaller groups of managers. With six to eight people. There you of course enter into a real dialogue.

So yes, I don't agree that slides are always a great way of input. We need to be careful with these things.

In university when the slides don't work the class can't be teached. A professor needs slides or otherwise they can't teach? I don't get that.

We talk about things that we know. We shouldn't talk about things we know nothing of.

Like that it should be, right?

Yes, I use many metaphors, images and anecdotes. Because I think that like that the message reams with the listener.

Evidently not a lot will stick after having listened to someone speak for one hour straight.

The managers of the companies I talk to have to go more into certain specifics also.

I am a great believer in specificity. And I believe that the brain works, no, I don't just think so, I know that the brain works best handling specific subjects.

General subjects are great to frame certain concepts but after that you have to go into the specifics both in volleyball and in managing companies.

Some speeches don't serve an actual purpose. And you also don't need too many general or overarching concepts in there.

Okay, they need to exist to understand what we are talking about.

But I'll give you an example.

I never say my team. 'We have to play as a team'. That's just a general concept. I make my team play together, yes. With concrete tasks which make them play as a team.

My skillset is that I can do that with a volleyball team. A manager needs to be able to do that with his company.

But it needs to be specific advice.

It doesn't mean that the general stuff doesn't matter. It's there to complete everything, to wrap everything up.

One of your talents is of course being a great storyteller. With a wide use of anecdotes and visualizations. There are many ways to teach, but what can a coach do when it doesn't come all that natural to them?

Yes, there are many ways. I have this particular background. I was influenced by religion because my family was, which is not common in Argentina, Methodist.

My great-grandfather was English. And in the Protestant church the children don't participate at the mass together with the adults. They go to another room and follow the so-called Sunday school.

Where they tell you all these stories and anecdotes from the Bible. And that always stood by me. They always used examples and stories there.

It really stood by me.

And while studying at the university we learned about Socrates' dialogues. Which made another impact. Not Hegel who is very theoretical, also interesting, but more difficult to read.

Much more Mao Tse Tung than Marx or Lenin. The Chinese use a lot of images, even their writing is very conceptual.

All these things impacted me. Other people have another upbringing and that's fine also.

What is important and even very essential, and what shouldn't be taken for granted is...

That it's not because you know something well, that you're also able to transfer it well.

You have to actually do the work to write down concepts in short which represent the bigger or longer concepts.

Because afterwards you'll have a team meeting where you use these concepts and it becomes a very long meeting. But during practice you don't have that time.

So that long concept must become a sentence. What in the English language gets called a 'key concept'.

The keywords that figuratively open you up to the longer concept in an instant.

And also here I have a story of course.

In school for a test we had our little cheat card that we put in our pants. Because the exact date of these battles were impossible to remember.

I used it once because I was afraid that I didn't study enough for the exam.

After preparing the cheat sheet though, I wouldn't use it. Because if I had to synthesize the concepts that were in the book in just a few words on a small card, I had already done the work I needed to do.

I remembered everything perfectly.

You need to do the effort to write it all down.

After that you walk by your player and you tell them: 'The tempo'. And they know what you mean. Or 'give it more height',or 'take it higher'. Finished. We spoke about it before.

In attack: 'Use more directions'. Finished.

But if you didn't do the work you'll talk too much during practice. The practice looses it's rhythm, and players just stop listening.

You'll be a radio that's always on, where no one's listening to.

And in the Anglo-Saxon countries, I don't know how it's in Belgium, they have a serious advantage over French, Italian and Spanish speakers. English is more conceptual, and it's very concise.

We in Latin countries need to make a more serious effort to be better at it.

What are things you feel that coaches should stop doing?

The things I see very often during the match. Is that the coaches talk about what happened in the previous point.

That has no sense, because the player has to just think about the next ball. Not about the previous ball.

Many times the coaches 'put the brain of the player in the past'. Not in the future.

This mostly happens because the coach is being too emotional. He's angry.

Or they want to teach during the match. The match is not the right moment to teach.

Players know what they know. They have to win with the things they know. With what they learned til that moment. Sometimes it goes better, sometimes worse. That's normal. But it's not the moment to teach.

The things you say during the timeout are to help to remember your players of something. But not to teach.

When you play nothing has to be said. Just 'next ball. Come on. Next ball. Forget what just happened'.

A young player asked me: What do I have to do when I get aced in reception. I said, forget about it. Completely forget it. It never happened. Do you need to find or know the reason for your mistake? No, that needs to be done during training. The player is nervous, they don't like to be aced. But forget it, next ball.

Because the next ball will be different. If I tell you: Oh, pay attention to your foot work. Maybe the next ball is not about their foot work. Because it arrives differently.

So that the first thing. And the second thing.

We have to improve the weak points of a player. But the player must always feel that we believe in them.

It's the same for our sons or daughters of course. This makes a big difference. If the player believes or feels, not even thinks, that: hey, my coach is not happy with me. That is a big problem.

That is way more impactful than what you actually are teaching. That is the real art. It's difficult to learn, I know.

Because the problem is not what you tell them. You can tell them: 'No, I believe in you.'

But the player understands and feels the real truth. As it's with our kids. They can feel when you're not authentic. I don't know why that is.

You have to be able to transmit that you really believe in them. 'I'm asking more of you because I'm sure you can do it.'

Those are the two most important things.

Do you have a particular goal? Maybe a goal that you already reached or a goal that is so hard to reach that it gives you daily motivation?

I like to be part of change. To resolve problems.

When I arrive in a club or a national team, I really like it when everything is going wrong. I like to build something back up. An entire organisation, implement concepts, increase the level of the team.

When everything is okay, it starts to be boring to me. That's a problem.

One time, a psychologist, a woman who worked with me in the national team in Italy, asked me: When will you stay in one place to finally collect the fruits of your labour?

I'm just afraid of one thing and that is to not work anymore. I'm never thinking of retiring and going to the Maldives. Okay, I'm also going to the Maldives, but that's going on a holiday.

No, I really need to do these things. I need to change stuff or resolve problems.

It's not the same if you just read a book. You don't resolve a problem when you read a book. You read a book, to resolve your problems. That's different.

I like my work right now because I have to resolve a lot of things for the junior national teams. With the coaches, the physical trainers, the physiotherapist, the players, with everything.

But in the future, I would like to train a women's volleyball team. I did that for a short period. It would be a great challenge.

I did good things in club volleyball. I did good things with the national teams. With different national  teams. I did well with junior teams.

Now I would like to test myself, if I can do the same with a women's team. That is one objective that I have. And after that I'll be old.

I have to ask the question. Why women's volleyball?

Because it's a long time ago that I coached women. And it's a different universe because women are so different than men. And the game is different, but women are different.

So that is what is interesting to me. When I started coaching the Italian women's national team in 1997. I studied a lot about women in general and women's volleyball.

But after that one year I stopped and went to the soccer teams and do other things.

I would like to return to women's volleyball.

Thanks Julio.

Part 2 is already coming up next weekend!



