===== SESSION: https://volleybrains.com/julio-velasco-2/ =====

----- VIDEOS -----
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=snYGqzgOZ84
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=p3UKyJd7Knk
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9m5JwM3cNAU
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JBmv3kj1cgY
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YfjXICzq9XQ
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qPvbCel12eo
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RQSNSb6pK_k
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NlG9Pjz-j0I
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uXhPLRRGZ78
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bDYm5uWDJ-E
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RTVKt3PR9bA

----- TEXTO -----
54. Julio Velasco: Be a happy and energetic coach.

In this 2nd Julio Velasco Masterclass article, we focus on the mistakes he feels he made and the lessons he learned from them. But we also go deeper into Julio's favorite resources which helped him become a master coach.

Julio covers possible rule changes to our game (also check out 'The Experiment'), how he regains his focus, and he talks about The Jungle Book, Socrates and Plato.

Enjoy!

Julio, according to you, what rule change is necessary? And why would you want to see this rule implemented?

I think that the double touch must be eliminated. It's not advantageous to our game. And for junior volleyball it's a terrible thing. They aren't playing. A serve mistake, another mistake, another mistake, they never play.

Our sport is already challenging to play. We have to let them to play. This it's not solved with refereeing. We just have to eliminate that rule.

This is one thing.

Something else is the challenge system. We need less interruptions in our game. I mean, you make a challenge, no problem, but you'll lose the opportunity to take a time-out, for example. Otherwise it's just too many interruptions.

And for men's volleyball. The game will be nicer to watch if we had more defense.

There are a lot of people who prefer high level women's volleyball. Over men's volleyball.

I hear more and more people say that they like the women's game more. Just because they defend more. It's not that easy to resolve this problem.

This was my next question. How can we resolve the problem?

Many years ago I wrote to Acosta about just this. It's not fair to apply the same rules to men and women. There must be a distinction.

For example. Middle blockers should stay on the court, in the backrow. But only to defend in second line. You can make a rule that they cannot attack after reception.

But you must also put in the rules, what the concept is of 'reception'. Because that doesn't exist right now. 'A first touch', is not the same as a reception.

But the middles should stay on the field. So you defend with seven. Which will give you the opportunity to be more tactical in defense. You can put a player three meters out of the field, for the balls that touch the block. Or one guy for the tip balls. Or 3 people digging the diagonal.

Now every team plays exactly the same. That is not good for our sport.

They play exactly the same. We need more variability of tactics, especially in defense.

The spiking is already nice and will get quicker and more spectacular. But we need more defense.

But not in the women's game. If you put another player in defense there the ball will never go down. But for the men's game it will be great.

I think that we can improve a lot. Eliminate interruptions and get a better defensive game in the men's game.

Best game you've ever seen. What recent or game from the volleyball vaults did validate once more that volleyball is the greatest sport on the globe.

Just the overall quality of the game is now higher than in the past. In any sport.

But the semi-final between Italy and Brazil in 1990 was the most emotional for me.

With 20.000 Brazilians screaming. That was a fantastic match.

Even more amazing than the final.

Of course, we won the final and became World Champions for the first time. But the atmosphere was incredible during that match against Brazil. The tiebreak ended 3-2.

That is all extremely 'easily remembered.'

When you feel overwhelmed or unfocused, or have lost your focus temporarily, what do you do?

Putting my problem next to the 'big problems' helped me a lot.

Okay, this is my problem. But is it really that large? Perhaps not, when compared to other problems.

It can also be a major issue at times. And there is nothing we can do to change it. Someone becomes ill or dies; both of these events have occurred to me. But what about other issues?

When you lose an important match, compare it to your bigger problems. Ok, it's important. We work to win. But it's just a match. It's sports.

Also don't always be focused on working.

To young coaches it seems I always want to work. But that's not true. There are days that I don't want to go to the hall. Maybe it's raining or it's cold outside.

But when I put my training suit on,  we must be like an actor. Like an actor, that goes there and does his thing on the podium.

You go there with energy. We can't be there with our head down and tell our players:  'Please do your best, guys'.

You have to go like: 'What a great day'. Not literally of course.  But that's how you need to come across. That is so important.

I always have the comedic actors in mind. There's nothing more difficult than that. Imagine you have a problem with your son or an argument with your wife. But you need to go there to make people laugh. There is nothing more difficult than that.

So we need to be like that with our players but with your staff also. Afterwards we go home and surrender. But they can't see you suffer.

It's not about being a hero. But be a happy, energetic person.

Keep it simple.

If you would have the ability to put together the world's most performing volleyball player. Which characteristics would he/she have.

Of course, it all depends on their role. It is necessary for spikers to place equal emphasis on receiving and attacking.

Some coaches now say that receiving is not that important. Because even if you receive four meters from the net and you have the spikers to solve it, you're good.

It isn't the same.

Today, we don't put in enough effort to improve our receiving skills.

Everyone is talking about service. Okay, if the serve is so important, I can agree with you. So...you will need to work more in reception also.

In the eighties, nineties, the teams were better receiving than now. When right now the service became more important. So it's something that doesn't add up.

And you have two types of serves, jump spin and float. In that time most serves were floats. So I think that is one thing.

So if we were to put together a great spiker we need Kiraly and Leon to come together.

Middle blockers. The middle blocker must be tall, but tall and fast because the game is so fast. So what is better, a middle blocker of 2m10 (7 footer), but not as fast? Or a player that's 2 meters tall and quicker? That's a good question.

How tall you are is important for read blocking the first tempo. But for moving to 4 and 2 it's necessary to be quick. So they need to be tall and quick.

The same goes for libero's. They need to defend, receive and set.

For setters. When you ask a young setter what they find most important. A lot of players say, to create a one block situation for my spiker.

And I tell them: 'Ask the spikers. What do they really prefer?'

A perfect ball with two blockers against you. Or a ball that's not very bad, but not perfect, with one block. Most of the spikers will say two blockers with a perfect ball.

So both creativity and precision are important. Not only in volleyball, but we are talking about volleyball, but opposites, contradictions live together. They don't exclude each other. And that is the most difficult thing.

We need players and teams that have a good balance between aspects of the game that sometimes seem contradictory. Precision is the opposite of creativity. But they have to come together in a setter.

So I can name a lot of players here. The velocity of Giba, with the power of Leon, with the stature of...

Coaches sometimes spend their time on things that are not useful. You can't pick and put together these players. Nobody can do that.

So the question becomes. I have these players with one kind of characteristic, I have to develop their strong points. But I also have to develop their weaker points. To create a good balance.

That is the point. That's what I said before. You have to work with your players.

But they must feel that you believe in them.

Don't tell a great receiver to get better at attacking all the time. He'll just think that you don't like him. He'll think that the coach wants a strong attacker. And I'm not that, I'm just good in reception.

No, you're excellent at reception. However, we are also working to improve your attack. That is the distinction.

If you can make the strongest 'starting six' in the world. What would your team look like?

It's not possible. There are far too many players. Excellent players.

If I include Kiraly. How do I keep Bernardi out? Cantagalli, perhaps? What about Giba? Or how about Kuznetzov? It's not possible. It's simply not possible.

For instance, I recall Kuznetzov. He was a fantastic player.

We usually only remember the players who win the World Championships and the Olympics. But Kuznetzov was a fantastic player. I remember when we studied him. When we played against him.

He attacked, tipped, hit block out. He did it all. Everything.

A fantastic receiver. He was extremely clever.

How can I compare him to Kiraly, Leon, Bernardi, Cantagalli, or Papi?

You know that I coached a team to two World Championships. For that reason, I could bring in the entire Italian team.

But I have a lot of respect for a lot of players who are exceptional, exceptional players.

If you could have a gigantic billboard anywhere with anything on it — metaphorically speaking, getting a message out to every athlete on the globe — what would it say?

I'll put:

Love your sport. Use your talent. Improve your weak points.

These three concepts.

Do you have a book that you like a lot? Which lessons did you get out of it?

I changed my working methods after reading the book of Carl McGown. That was an important read for my professional career.

A suggestion I want to make to coaches. Especially to young coaches.

Don't confuse reading something once with really knowing a certain subject.

A good book you never read just one time. Study them. Make your own conclusion. Write it out in your language, in your own words.

With McGown I did exactly that. You can take away things from any book. There isn't just one single truth.

Some books are very important to me. For example. The book of Rudyard Kipling. The Jungle Book.

That book is not only for kids, but also for grown ups. In there he talks about our society. How people function. There are important things in there for coaches as well.

For example when he talks about the wolfpack. When the chief of the wolves becomes old, they kill him. He doesn't go in pension.

That happens a lot in pro sports with coaches, but also with our players.

Positions change and we act like these people never existed.

It's important to have good timing.

Knowing when to stop for a player. Knowing when to change position for a coach. Or knowing when to do something else. It's important not to be killed.

So that book thought me a lot about that aspect also. I read it when I was a kid. And I read it again when I was a coach.

I also love the dialogues of Socrates.

In Greek culture they thought that the slaves cannot think like a philosopher. He demonstrated that, with the right questioning, he's able to let the slave understand philosophy. Very interesting. It relates to what a coach has to do with their players.

We ask too little questions to our players.

We only tell them what to do. Every person has things that maybe they aren't able to communicate. We need to help them out. We need to help our players.

Not just tell them what to do. The highest goal for the coach is...impossible to achieve, ideally speaking, but that the players don't need us anymore.

They go to play. They go to train without me. Alone. Because they know what they have to do. Of course, that's impossible.

The goal isn't that the players do what I want, my exclusive idea of volleyball. No. They need to have the knowledge, because they are the actors. We don't do anything. We have to convince our players 'to do'.

So we have to teach. Not only to teach, but first and foremost to teach.

They must understand the game. If I know a lot about volleyball and my players don't, or too little. I didn't do a good job.

They don't only have to play well. They have to know the game. Explain it to me, think about it and discuss among themselves.

What is your 'go-to' in moments of stress?

The normal things. The activity that takes most of the stress out is watching movies.

Even more so than reading. I like to read also.

But to completely relax; I mean I arrive home after a final that we lost, there I'll watch a good movie or series. I'm rewatching good films. Not the new stuff, because they are harder to find.

But I like to read also.

I like music a lot. I'm watching volleyball matches while I have music playing.

I don't listen to the commentary.

These three things. But now I live in the country and we have a big garden. So I enjoy working in the garden with music in my ears.

Perfect.

In the last five years, what new belief, behaviour, or habit has most improved your life?

Working in the garden. When I was a kid, my mother had a garden. But I hated working in the garden. My mother had me and my brother work there, but I just wanted to play soccer.

Now I finally discovered gardening. Before I just paid a gardener.

I started to cook also. With the pandemic a lot of people rediscovered cooking.

All things I just didn't do before. And I of course love spending time with my grandson and granddaughters.

How has a failure, or apparent failure, set you up for later success? Do you have a “favorite failure” of yours?

One that comes to mind is when I coached a children's under-14 team in Argentina. I prepared the tournament final as if I were coaching seniors.

I channeled my inner Al Pacino on them. It was a disaster. A complete disaster. They didn't play.

Because I proposed something that didn't connect with them.

I learned that a completely different approach was needed.

That is one. That was a real failure. Because it's not that each time you lose that we can talk about failing of course.

We lost the Atlanta 1996 Olympic final in the tiebreak. That's not a failure. We played the entire match and we lost with 2 balls difference. That's not a failure.

A failure is when you make a big mistake. That if you could play again, you would change everything. I always tell my players. If tomorrow you want to play this game again. That is very bad.

If you did your best and it was not enough, okay, there was also another team there that competed. That's fine.

I made other mistakes as well of course.

Normally I choose rather well where I go to work. But I sometimes made mistakes. For love even. For example when I left Piacenza and went to Modena. I did that for my love of Modena.

In my first year at Piacenza we arrived to the playoff finals and I had to stay there. But Modena called me. And Modena is so important in my life. So I went, okay, but it was a mistake for my professional life.

When I become overly aggressive, I don't like myself. I need to rein in my aggressiveness. It's good for sports, but it causes me to overreact at times. That is something I need to work on.

Thank you, Julio.

Extra 1:

Dialogue with Meno's slave

Extra 2:

In our last Masterclass we mentioned Julio's 'decalogo'. 10 important concepts about leadership.

Here we share a translation from the original article.

A coach doesn't play, he convinces his players to play (to become a great coach, you must kill the player within you)

Julio Velasco explained the difficulties many former players, especially champions, have in stepping into a new role, that of the coach. This is explained by the fact that they used to decide games by themselves.

And so they have a hard time explaining and convincing others to do exactly that, they are still tempted by the idea that they can solve stuff themselves rather than delegate.

This is also true for entrepreneurs, even though they also have their own tasks and need to manage on top of that. But who doesn't fall into the temptation of saying, "I'll do it sooner than explain it to you?" That's why to "coach" (not just in sports), you have to kill the player within.

2. When a mistake happens, you must look for the reason, not the culprit

It's easy to blame somebody and offload the issue as it's someones fault. Much harder to get to the bottom of it and find actual solutions.

3. You start to build your team by establishing its roles

If all defenders thought they could solve games on their own, maybe they would, in one circumstance. In the next one, however, it might be that they got faked out, lose their cover, and the opponent scores a goal.

If you don't respect the roles, everything blows up.

Velasco also gave the opposite example. What happens if a defender, who doesn't pass the ball, goes on to score a goal? He will think he can decide games and brag about it. The forwards will be told that they are not doing the job they are paid to do. And these forwards will be the first to enjoy any goal their own team takes because of a mistake of that defender. We are human beings. This is also true in business.

4. Even celebrate missed attempts, just like we do with our children

When a child tries to say a new word and fails, we cheer them on. When they try to ride a tricycle and fall off, we cheer them on. Because they are trying. Because they are putting their all into it. The same should happen within companies. Celebrate every little bit of progress.

5. "Yes, yes, but...." means "No".

If there is no conviction in the answer, there won't be conviction in it's implementation.

6. Say "great" more often. Also say it to the ones that always excel. Men need recognition. To women, multiply it by four.

Compliments help you to perform better. Hearing "bravo" from your leader is the best way to keep on improving.

7. Every once in a while we need someone to push us into the pool. To force us to swim.

A great leader takes you further. He pushes you to take risks and try things you've never tried before. He also pushes you into the pool if necessary, because he is aware that you will make the best of it and that you'll learn how to swim. If you are a leader, your job is to figure out which of your people will be able to swim even in a pool with crocodiles in it.

8. Repeatedly ask "why"  to your employees. Often conflicts arise but we never asked "why".

Behind everyone's choices there are always convincing or less convincing motivations. Go deep: always ask "why". It is the best way to get to know them, and to get more out of them.

9. You can't have a steady job at the Post Office and lead a reckless life like Vasco Rossi (an Italian rockstar)

If you want to take risks and you want to pursue a dream, you have to dedicate yourself to that dream. Velasco cites his early years as a coach as an example: to coach in Jesi he had dropped everything, accepting a minimum wage contract.

If he had continued to coach at random, he would not have become the best coach in the world and he would perhaps also not have had any satisfaction from his old job either.

At the heart of it all is the focus: choose a path, devote yourself to it, monitor the results.

10. Winners celebrate, losers explain

This is one of Julio Velasco's most famous phrases.



