===== SESSION: https://volleybrains.com/jennifer-petrie/ =====

----- VIDEOS -----
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=P5nniPV_1NI
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=y5al1XBsDF0
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jeXVMI5pkKo
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zCi4Zr5D0ag
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=S5XSyzwNDQs
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_bGur0lxHcI
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0zVXDGfXi8A
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZKRtkf2gRyg
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PuC31eucVvc
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EOoLvo4MpOE
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cuCG7244hEA
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=z-vgFrmNxu4
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NspH_Z7rbKg
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qedeHaS_RY0
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UfIPmRQuGpo
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8O5wEHRO6u8
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3uic6-6rw_4
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KycvuhG_2F0
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iEHRzR4EEZw
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cCqe2BvoQog
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cFgKurtzx34
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cIIDitOiWAg
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ayYzPGbmx8Y

----- TEXTO -----
55. Jennifer Petrie: Be kind to yourself.

In this Masterclass we feature Jennifer Petrie, the head coach of the University of San Diego women's volleyball team. In 2022 coach Petrie was recognized as the AVCA National Coach of the Year, and San Diego set a national record with 28 consecutive wins.

San Diego reached their first Final Four ever in 2022. The Toreros reached a 31-2 overall record, their lone two losses in 2022 came at the hands of the teams that played for the national championship — Texas and Louisville.

Jennifer goes over a lot in this Masterclass:

What her philosophy on building team culture is

How to handle team dynamics and conflicts within the team

What she recognized and improved upon after previous failures

Advice to coaches starting out

And so, so much more

There are 21 subtitled video clips in this Masterclass, enjoy!

If you have the chance for sure check all the clips, fun intersections don't translate that well to text, but they are all there in the clips. 🙂

Jennifer, when did you decide to commit to being a professional volleyball coach? What pushed you towards that decision?

After college I wanted to get a master's degree. I really didn't know what I was gonna do with my life. But volleyball had been such a large part of who I was.

So I took an assistant coaching job at Indiana State. I'm from San Diego and I went to school at William and Mary. So Indiana was a pretty large departure from anything I was used to. But they hired me site unseen, I didn't go out there to interview or anything. So I went there and I spent one season coaching there and decided that I was not good in the cold.

The next season I was very fortunate to be able to go to the University of North Carolina and work with Joe Sagula. I got my master's there in sports administration. I really knew that the athletic world was something that I wanted to stay in. I wasn't sure that it was gonna be coaching at that point, but in some capacity, I wanted to be around sport. (I'm a extremely competitive person.)

So after four years at North Carolina, I knew that I couldn't live a life that was just gonna be behind a desk doing the same things over and over again. I needed the highs and the lows of competing.

At that point I was really fortunate to be hired at the University of San Diego, which is my hometown.

It's just an unbelievable blessing to be able to coach and live in the same place that you want to live the rest of your life. Together with your family

So when was the exact moment? When I got this job at USD and got to do what I really love and in this sport. And be in the place where I wanted to raise a family and be with my family.

There was pretty much nothing else that I wanted to do after that.

What advice would you give yourself as a starting coach? An advice that is so clear and logic for you now, but that you had to develop over the years.

One of the things that I always come back to is that it's so important that you surround yourself with people that do things better than you do.

And that can be intimidating. My first hire here at USD, as a full-time assistant was Brent Hilliard. And he is a very decorated player. An Olympian and National Player of the year here at Long Beach State and he has just so much volleyball knowledge.

I knew that in my program, I needed somebody that had that kind of volleyball knowledge and that could come in and help train.

But it was definitely a scary proposition to think I'm bringing in somebody that knows more than I do, clearly.

How can we manage and live together when, I'm the head coach and maybe this person is going to make me feel inferior. But as my career progressed, I just really leaned into that knowing that I'm gonna surround myself with people that do things better than I do.

We can collaborate and I can learn. It's so important that you don't stop learning.

What are bad recommendations you hear about coaching or training volleyball?

I mean, the big part of what I do here at San Diego is just really promoting balance. So when people are talking about quantity over quality. I think that that is a mistake. I like to give my players a lot of time off.

I'll often be in practice and say we shouldn't go on Monday, that we need to step away.

I know there's a lot of talk about having coaches in the gym in the summer. I don't think that's a great idea.

People wanna train more, because more is gonna be better? I don't think always more is better.

We're really fortunate because our season ends in December, but at USD we don't start school until almost the end of January.

So we have six weeks in between our fall and spring semester and I'm like, just go do something outside. Because when you come back, you're gonna be eager to be back in the gym and excited to practice again. So have some other experiences out there.

I think balance is so important. As coaches, we just feel like sometimes the more reps, the more time I spend in the gym, the more invested they are, the more film they watch, the more team meetings we can have, that means that I'm working hard and it's not always working smart.

Do you have a particular goal? Maybe a goal that you already reached or a goal that is so hard to reach that it gives you daily motivation?

Yeah. For me it's just sustained excellence. I mean, I'm shocked that I've been here for 25 years. I feel like that's impossible.

And every year I'm like, I gotta sustain this. Every year I wanna be able to match the level of success we've had in the past. We're only good as we are tomorrow. It doesn't matter what I did in the past. How long can I keep this up? So my goal every year is that, we gotta raise the bar.

We have to do something better. When I first took the job back in 97, I was the assistant for Sue Snyder, she was on the national team for a while and we won back to back conference championships under her.

I was very fortunate to get the head coaching job. I was very young. In my late twenties. I just thought, I hope I don't like tear down this empire right now because I could destroy all of our work within a matter of two years.

Then as the years kept going on, it drove me to continue to be successful. Even with the success behind you.

The challenge is; where are you going to progress? What's next?

In one of your post game interviews you talked about 'the culture work' that you do. About the vision, about pillars, about the foundation of the program. From a practical POV, new players coming in, integrating players; how do you go about structuring all that.

Well I can say that last year. We really, really invested ourselves in trying to establish some really strong culture.

And it started in January. I look at your volleyball  season as a year long process, right? And a lot of people think, oh, you start in August, that's when your season starts.

No, this whole run starts in January. And we really spent a lot of time, we devoted at least one hour a week out of our eight hours of training just to talk about what our culture's gonna look like, what our pillars are gonna look like.

I could probably talk a lot just about the foundation of our program. How we're gonna establish trust, how we're gonna become resilient, how we're gonna be unified. We spent a lot of time in developing our pillars and then talking about, well you can talk all day long about, we wanna stay brave, we wanna protect the team.

But you have to actually put those into action, right? You have to actually be accountable for what we're saying.

So we would get in small groups, we talk about what it looks like, what it doesn't look like. And then how we're gonna resolve when we get off track. One of the biggest areas is, we can all say what we want, but what happens when it's not?

And how are we gonna move forward? So we spent time talking about conflict resolution, how we're going to address people when things go south. And you need to have a serious conversation with somebody about, you know, you're not on board with us right now, but we really need you. So you have to listen to them with the intent that they care about you, right?

We work a lot on conflict resolution. How we're gonna manage each other. We learned how to talk in a circle. The team knows that if there's an issue on the table, they can go to our council. The council has been voted on by their teammates. It's usually three players. Doesn't matter, if they're starters or how old they are.

We want some different opinions and outlooks, perspectives for the council. The council's in charge of making sure that everybody's okay and that the pillars are being upheld. Players can go to the council, talk to them if they have an issue. The council could decide, okay, we're gonna meet in a circle.

Once they meet in a circle, the topic comes up and then they pass it around and everybody speaks. Coaches are not typically in that circle. But if there's something that the council or a player feels like it needs to be addressed on a higher level, then of course my door is always open. Each player knows that they can come in and can come talk to me at any time.

But there's a lot of things that happen in teams that don't have to be addressed by coaches.

They have to be accountable and have some autonomy over what's happening with your program and you have to trust them.

That's the one thing about the transfer portal, that's been a little bit hard because we're replacing people from the top now instead of allowing them to develop in your program.

Because for me, typically my juniors and seniors are those that know how this program runs and what the expectations are. They develop into leaders by the time they're juniors and seniors. Under the guise of what USD volleyball should stand for, those type of leaders.

But when you're replacing 'em from the top, they don't have any idea what you're standing for. They're just here. And I'm very fortunate because the transfers that I had this past year with Gabby Blossom and Bre Edwards, they just soaked it all in so fast.

Going back to your programs pillars. Are they defined at the start of the season? Did the coaches come up with them, or was it a group effort? And of course, what are they?

We developed the pillars together in the last couple of years. It hasn't been a long time. And I actually just spent some time thinking about, should these pillars progress season to season? Or is this just a one time thing? Right.

And I decided, I was talking to the team the other day, I said, these pillars not only are going to live with San Diego volleyball, but they're gonna live with you for life.

Because I really feel like they can apply in so many situations and in so many challenges and adversity that you might face. Not just on your team, but in your relationships, in your workspace, your health.

There's so many avenues that you can take something away from them. So the pillars are stay brave, always compete, protect the team and get on board.

Right now, we've narrowed it down. Each week we've been addressing a new pillar and go over how that pillar applies to us today, not how did they apply to us last fall, when we had this great tournament run.

You know we have a lot of change right now in our program and there's a lot of things that we have to address head on. How it's gonna be different and unique to this year?

The pillars are great because we can dive in each week and talk about, what does it mean for us right now?

This reminds me of this clip by Greg Carvel.

The pillars aren't just empty words. They are a support system, they are all encompassing, every issue or problem can be connected to one or more of them.

No, a hundred percent. You have to live them every day, they have to live and breathe them in how you communicate with each other.

They have to be everyday language. And when you see it, you have to identify it. That's an instance where you just, you stay brave. You're serving at Matchpoint in the Final four, you'd better stay brave. Right.

And we have to talk about what makes it credible that you can do those things, right? You have to be able to reach back into that when the moment arises.

We had a bucket where you'd write down, what things gave you the right to believe that you can do this. And then you just create this whole imagery in your mind.

Every time you have to lean on something, you need to be able to reach back to knowing that: hey, I've done this before.

Do you use mindfulness apps or meditation in general?

I worked with Brent Hilliard for 20 years. I think one of the most challenging things is change, right?

I mean 20 years is a long time to be able to work with somebody and have a system in place. And we didn't make a lot of change in 20 years, the way we did it was the way we did it.

He left and got the head coaching job at San Diego State and I hired Alfred Reft. And Alfred was very big into mindset and mindful thinking and breathing.

He brought a lot to our program. That was a big departure from what I had been doing in the past. So it was very valuable and I think that the players really benefited from him in learning how to control their mind. We would do some mindfulness at the beginning of practice, and always before matches.

But again, that's bringing in somebody that does something better than I do.

When preparing for the next game, how does your general approach look like and did you ever change your approach? Why did you change and was the outcome beneficial?

I feel that this fall probably was one of the best years that we've had in our preparation. We went on a run where we swept a lot of teams in a row and were prepared.

And it was amazing to me because, whenever you're facing a team and you're like, okay, we should handle this team pretty well, we should be able to beat them pretty solidly.

Those are typically the matches that I worry about the most. Cause I'm like, my athletes are on maybe 50%. They're gonna sense, how hard do I have to play to actually win this match. That's when I worry about trying to motivate them.

We decided that this year we had them develop a roadmap, a weekly roadmap on Monday for how they were gonna approach that particular week and those particular opponents. And it didn't matter what we were doing after that.

Every week provides a different puzzle.

Are you traveling? What type of environment are you gonna be playing in? Is it midterms? Are your parents coming into town? Is there distraction? Did you not sleep this week? There's so many things in a weekly basis, and I think they did an excellent job of every week on Monday looking at that particular week, those particular opponents.

And we know this match is gonna be a conference championship match. Or this week we have to travel to BYU and we know that that environment can be very electric. We love playing at BYU, but it's a difficult place to win in.

So every week is different. Right. This year we did a tremendous job of really staying present in our weekly preparation.

We had a system of scouting opponents that worked really well. We would call them appetizer videos because we would just put together a hitting montage and roll those out so that they could watch 'em on their phones on a Monday or Tuesday.

Just to get an idea of what our opponents look like for the weekend, but not the full scout, not the six court scout rotation, serve receive and all of that. We'd watch some appetizers, they'd get a feel for it.  And then midway through the week we would start really diving in into specifics of their offense and how we were gonna approach it defensively. And whatever changes we might be looking to make for the week.

But a lot of the week really is spent trying to improve what we can do best.

The future of volleyball, from a technical point of view, how will the game evolve according to your opinion?

I think that right now what I'm seeing is that the offense is becoming so fast. And there's so many lanes being filled.

We are overloading so many blockers right now, and the back row game is becoming such a huge part of what's happening in women's volleyball.

You have to have a setter, first of all, that is very elite in being able to see those opportunities and see those lanes.

Because it's like an orchestra. Everybody's playing at that same rhythm. For us that's been a lot of fun because, you have to have all the athletes that can terminate and run. Be able to identify all these things.

We do a lot of "turn, run, read, call". You have to be able to get off the net, read the situation very fast, and be able to call out what's available to you.

And not only depending on the speed that you're playing. But what does the block look like? There's so much going on right now.

I think in the reading of the game, way more so than a decade ago even. Before it was here hit this high ball out there. You didn't really pay as much attention to what the defense was on doing the other side.

You were playing to your own strengths, but now the overloading and all the lanes have been a tremendous improvement to the game.

How do you implement different ways of learning in your practices?

Watching video is instrumental to their learning, to be able to further explain what you're trying to get at.

So we will often open up drills with five clips and we'll just say, watch this at the highest level, this is what we're trying to achieve. And if it doesn't make sense to you by what I'm saying to you, then you have to see it. Right? So we certainly will watch international volleyball.

We'll watch our opponents that are doing it well, we'll watch ourselves when we've done it well. Or here's three examples of us where we need to improve this skill. Or your reading. Or your tempo. Or whatever it might be.

It's really great because, Alfre Raft is one of the assistant coaches with Karch Kiraly for the national team. So he's watching volleyball all the time on an international level and really brought a lot of that to our team as well.

According to you, what rule change is necessary? And why would you want to see this rule implemented?

Oh my gosh, this is not a good question for me.

Because I started playing volleyball when it was a side-out scoring game to 15. And I really loved that back then. And then they wanted to change it and game five went rally score. And I was like, are you kidding me? We just went to war for two and a half hours and now we're gonna decide who wins this in five minutes.

That just didn't seem logical to me. I didn't understand that. We served from a box and we didn't hit let serves, so there were many changes since I started playing the game.

I'm not a big person on change, I guess. It takes me a while. And like you said, I wanna preserve what volleyball, what the game is.

And it's evolved so much since I started to play myself. That now I can't even wrap my head around what would be next. Right? Seven players on the court? What are they gonna tell us what to do now?

I do feel like our players need to continue to be well-rounded volleyball players, and be able to not be so specialized in what they do on the court.

I miss everyone being able to have the same ball control and defensive abilities and being able to set the second ball and all of that.

But our middle blockers just go block and try to be able to transition. But you know, the ball's gonna find you, the ball's gonna find you on the court so you better know what to do with it. In our gym, all of our players do a lot of different things.

What can I see different in the future? I don't know because, I am a creature of habit and I like the way things are now. So we'll see what they throw at us.

Best game you've ever seen or been a part of. What recent game did validate once more that volleyball is the greatest sport there is.

For me, out all of the games that I've watched or been a part of, our match against Stanford this past year to go to the Final four encapsulated everything that we had worked on all year.

There were points in that match, so many different points in that match that exposed all of our pillars. That showed the grit, the determination, the passion. We always say play with joy. They were so brave.

It was just like everything flowed into that one match. Of course winning a match is always great, but we really saw the growth of this team over the year in that one match.

And we've had other big wins in our career. I've watched other high level volleyball matches, but for some reason that match in particular, just encircled everything, a truly phenomenal piece of work.

If you can make the strongest 'starting six' in the world, right now. What would your team look like?

The thing about me is that I don't know a lot of international volleyball. I have, first of all the worst memory ever. If you were to ask me even on my own team who's played with who or who's been here, or what they did, or what my record was, or when we won this, that, or the other. I don't know. I don't remember.

I don't have the capacity for that. So even when I watch people play and, you know even great players, I forget names in a second.

And then I forget the matches that I watched. I forget the circumstances.

That's why your favorite game is just four months ago, right? :-)

Yeah, totally. Cause I can't even remember the games that we played before that. Or the Olympic games that I've watched or the international games. I have a very short memory, a very short memory.

I know that over in the States, you just see less international volleyball. So it's normal that the knowledge is different. But sometimes coaches amaze me. And that's why I always ask the question, and that's why I tend to go over every question also.

I think there's a lot of coaches out there that are true academics. And when you ask them, what do you read, what do you listen to, what did you watch, they will have a clear cut answer, and that's great.

Me, I read my daughter's permission slip yesterday. And I've read a lot of emails. I don't have a lot of time in my life to dedicate to myself and my own knowledge. I feel like I'm constantly giving, and that is one of my things for all of the women coaches out there.

Be kind to yourself because we're all trying to be something for everyone in our lives.

It's difficult to put so much pressure on yourself to be great in every category. I'm like, okay, you don't have time to read the greatest books on this list of the best leaders out there.

But I have to be authentic and real. And put it out there that whatever is happening right now in my life and my player's life and my own children's life, that that's the most important thing at the time.

If you could have a gigantic billboard anywhere with anything on it — metaphorically speaking, getting a message out to every athlete on the globe — what would it say and why?

On the theme of what we've been talking about, is just to be kind to yourself. I think that everyone is so hard on themselves. With the social media and everything. The comparisons that are out there. The feeling that you're not enough. And the imposter syndrome that you are living and trying to be something that you don't feel like you are.

Just be kind to yourself.

Because we're all trying to do and be the very best that we can be every day.  And you can't judge yourself on what you perceive as your failures.

What is an unusual habit or an absurd thing that you love?

I feel like I am generally mostly quirky. I like to belly laugh. I like to have a good time. I don't like to be stuck in being super serious all the time.

I like to get to know athletes as people. I love it when they become alumni and we can have these relationships where we go out and we have great dinners. Where we talk and we laugh and we reminisce.

Not that those are quirky things, but I just don't take myself too seriously.

I love karaoke. I love to dance. I love music. None of it is really that unusual or that quirky, I guess.

How has a failure, or apparent failure, set you up for later success? Do you have a “favorite failure” of yours?

I saw that question. I looked at some people's answers to it also. For me, two different things come to mind.

When I was at North Carolina as the assistant coach, I was in a long distance relationship with my husband who was in California, across the country. I went out and I interviewed at Northern Arizona for their assistant coaching position. And I was just so eager to have that opportunity to be closer to my eventual husband. I'm like, God, this is gonna be fantastic. And I was so excited.

I went out there, I tried to crush the interview. I didn't get the job and I was crushed. And about two months later, the job opened at USD.

That just reminds me all the time that you can't judge, what you perceive as a failure to be a failure. Because you don't know what's gonna happen next. If I had gotten that job, I would've missed out on this tremendous opportunity that I've had for my entire career now.

So sometimes what you think is horrible and could be the worst, maybe it's the Chinese farmer parable. Maybe it is, maybe it's not.

In addition to that, one of the big failures that I think really gave us an opportunity this year was losing in the first round last year to Rice.

To a team that was just full of determination. That whole covid year where we had two seasons in one year. We all went to the NCAA tournament in the convention center in Omaha, 48 teams, and one of Rice's players tested positive for covid.

And so they were eliminated from the tournament. We faced them in the first round, in the fall, back to back seasons. And they just annihilated us. And it was such a huge failure at the end of that year that we really took a look at ourselves and said, what do we have to do next year to make a change?

And we came in very determined.

I think that failures can propel you to really take a look inside and hopefully change for the better. I think that coaching exposes you to being a failure all the time. Because in-game management is constantly failing. Be it poor player  management, a bad time out call or whatever else.

There's so many things that you're like, why did I do that? How did I miss that opportunity to, you know, spin the dial or make rotation or not use that player.

You go home every night and think about the small failures that you've had. So yeah, I've got a lot of 'em. I don't know if there's a favorite one.

Do you have a book that you like a lot? Which lessons did you get out of it?

I do like Legacy. I really resonate with a lot of what's in that book. Just because I think it's really important that you stay humble, right? Their whole "sweep the sheds" and "leave that jersey better than you found it". Take pride in the program that you're playing for.

Be grateful for what you have. And never think that you are bigger than the entire whole. I think that's really important and powerful stuff.

During Covid our team read "Chop Wood and Carry Water". Just about falling in love with the process.

And that was a really interesting time to read that, because the process every day was to get on a Zoom call with your teammates, every single day. We broke down the chapters of that book together on Zoom from our living rooms and bedrooms. That I think was a really timely time and space for understanding that.

The journey is the day in and the day out of things. You have to seek joy in the every day experience.

What is one of the best or most worthwhile investments you’ve ever made?

For me it's investing in relationships, that's the most rewarding thing. And I was very fortunate to invest.

You have to invest in your staff and be able to trust them. I took two entire seasons off for maternity leave. And stepped away from our program and trusted that my staff could manage without me.

Anybody that thinks that it's not gonna run if I step away, they're sorely mistaken. Because you've invested yourself in the program. They understand what you believe in, how it should be run. The ability to take a step back and say, all right you guys here you go, I'll see you next season, is an important one.

I also went and saw my daughter. I have a junior in college now. She's playing volleyball at Boston College, and I took a weekend off this past season. Our team was playing and I trusted my staff to be able to manage those matches while I was gone.

Because some things in life are so big, we gotta remember we're coaching volleyball, and we sometimes need to show up for other people when we need to.

But investing in relationships, I think for me is the most important thing.

In the last five years, what new belief, behavior, or habit has most improved your life?

Have I made any changes? I will say that the pickle ball thing is huge for me. I'm extremely competitive and there's very few sports right now that I can go out and feel like I can actually be successful at and compete at.

I can't play volleyball at the level that my brain thinks I can play volleyball. It's just silly. I mean, why would I even wanna try to play volleyball anymore? It's not gonna actually execute the way I want.

But if you step on the pickle ball court, you can compete just like you would in any other sport. And it gives me endorphins for life.

I love to compete. I love to get out there. So that's been a change in my life and something that I do when I need to get away. Because once you're in that moment, all of us as athletes know that when you're in the moment of playing something and you're that intent. You don't think about anything else. It's such a departure from life.

It gives me a time to step away and be like, I'm just gonna focus on this right now.

So that's been a huge change in what I do. I'll play three or four times a week.

When you feel overwhelmed or unfocused, or have lost your focus temporarily, what do you do?

I think that you need to obviously just step away. You and I were just talking about executing the balance of things.

You're all the way up here with volleyball, but family's here now. If this is too heavy and too hard and I need to step away, then I'm gonna go have a great meal with my family and put that aside for a while or see some friends or go to lunch with somebody.

I love to eat, so to get a nice meal with friends and be able to talk and chat and catch up with somebody. Pick up the phone, call somebody you haven't talked to in a while. Just ground yourself with what's important in life.

Those are the things that I like to do if and that's what I tell my team too.

We have to be vulnerable enough to say, it's hard right now. I'm having a hard time. Can you help me? So many people won't do that because they're afraid of interfering with somebody else's life. They think that other people won't have time to deal with me.

And you know that for most people, anybody that would come to you and say, Hey, I need your help, I would do anything to help that person. And a lot of people would. So why is it that we are all uncomfortable reaching out for that help?

Because we're afraid that that person isn't gonna have the time for us. So that has been a thing where I'm like, it's time to be vulnerable with those that you trust, that you're close with.

Let them know that you're struggling with something. So that they can help you and you have to be able to receive that help.

So if there are times when I'm feeling like I can't handle this anymore, or I need to step away, it's usually time to reach out to somebody else.

Thank you, Jennifer.



