===== SESSION: https://volleybrains.com/jim-mclaughlin/ =====

----- VIDEOS -----
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Ie1J9q11-4o
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Ye5mZXoMhSY
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-VlNlJJ4prY
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zsrOnHVYoes
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lZNxPCZqdM8
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kvRx0WVjvyU
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XD3RWgnvGcM
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4KhWmWNziVM
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=H54L92nGHRk
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CV-Hxc3mIr0
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jkPGyah3EsA
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IGkevEZLmNw
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sJI3XgvgXrw
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NeS2uSfcKzQ
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pP7PA8S7ADw
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1XHHavdCIBw
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZuSpZggiJj8
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YJOdHpliA1Q
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BRHvFNqEugU
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rabyIv-yf8Q
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MCwZ4UGw_b4
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4Ay1gYTc3UM
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5UjM1d8UPxc
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jJpKLyf3NfE

----- TEXTO -----
58. Jim McLaughlin: The game is the game.

In this Masterclass we feature Jim McLaughlin. Jim earned his spot in the AVCA Hall of Fame in 2021 for his contributions to college volleyball. Coach McLaughlin holds the distinction of being the only coach to win both Division I men's and women's volleyball championships.

Jim took over the Washington program in 2001, the year before they were last in the Pac-10, and turned them around into a winning program winning the Pac-10 in 2004 and the NCAA Championship in 2005.

In his 13 years at Washington Jim has coached and developed 31 All-Americans, and turned Washington into a national powerhouse.

Even more on coach McLaughlin's career can be found over here.

In this Masterclass Jim talks about:

How he thinks about learning and transferring knowledge

The importance of proper beliefs, methods and structure

Why the World Championship final of 2018 was so important to him

What he wants to transfer to young coaches

His insights into player development...

But honestly, this list could go on and on, and even the descriptions above don't even scratch the surface of this in-depth conversation with Jim.

This Masterclass counts 8000+ words and 20 subtitled video clips. Chop it up into a couple of sittings and soak it all up.

Before we get this started a big thanks to coach McLaughlin for his availability.

Enjoy!

Jim, why did you decide to commit to being a volleyball coach? What pushed you towards that decision?

Maybe I got a little lucky. I remember I was finishing up my eligibility as a player at UC Santa Barbara, and I had to finish school.

So my college coach, Kenny Preston, asked me to stay on, be in the gym and help the team. And I loved it. It could feel I loved it. It was something I really enjoyed doing. I felt like I could help. There were a lot of benefits to it.

And then I graduated and I got a job in Hollywood, believe it or not. I was putting sound on motion pictures. It was a good paying job.

But that night, after they called me and said: "Hey, you got the job". I got a call from Rod Wilde and Marv Dunphy. And they said: "Can you come to Pepperdine and help us?" Just for you to know that it would make me barely any money.

I remember I was sitting with my dad and my dad said to me: "Hey, don't close any doors. You're too young. Go check it out."

I always listened to my parents. And I went there. Just in two days, watching practice, looking at the activities, feeling the vibe, the players were good, well, I just thought, wow, it took everything to another level and I thought this is the road I want to travel.

It was that day that I thought, I want to coach forever. I ended up calling the CEO for this film company and I said:" Hey, I'm gonna be a coach". And he wished me well.

So to think back on it. I'm just thankful for volleyball, on too many levels.

It's taken me around the world, all the people I've met. It's been unbelievable.

I can't remember what year it was exactly, maybe it was 1984 or 1985. It is a long time ago.

What advice would you give yourself as a starting coach? An advice that is so clear and logic for you now, but that you had to develop over the years. (Can be about anything)

The advice I'd give, and you gotta be careful giving advice. I remember Carl (Carl McGown) telling me: "Be careful of who you listen to and be careful what you read."

I would give the advice he gave me, and that was to become a better teacher.

You know, Matias, I didn't understand that initially. I didn't even understand what that meant. But I understood it more and more, as I learned more about it.

I kind of acquired this ability as a teacher, and it's an acquired ability for sure. It was the greatest advice that he ever gave me. And I'm most thankful for that advice.

You know, there's so much going on as a coach, and coaching can be divided into many different things.

But teaching for me became the biggest and most important part. And in order to become a better teacher, I had to understand about teaching. I had to understand learning. And I had to acquire this ability.

Now, over time, I started to acquire some knowledge and it was this content stuff, this task side of coaching that was important.

Maybe my education as a coach started through my education as a player, but those things are different. I learned some things and I started getting knowledge and then I just wanted to continue to learn.

But then the key to it was, I had to learn how to apply that knowledge. There's lots of people that know stuff, but that don't know how to do stuff.

I'm helping coaches now, and I'm blown away by their knowledge. But their teams don't do the stuff they're telling me.

So I had to really get into a process. For me, that was really the key to coaching. And then, over the course of a career, you learn how to make better choices and decisions. I really think that separates people.

Because teaching is about a lot of things. To me when my teams played the best, they were making really good choices and decisions in these different situations. Hitting the right shots, who takes this ball, all the different things.

And they were aware, and they were smart.

And I think a coach teaches their players how to do that.

When I was at USC, I coached men and I inherited a really good team. Bob Yoder was the coach before me. He was so good. I was with Marv Dunphy and Rod Wilde, so I copied some stuff. I didn't really understand why, but I was doing some things that they had done and I had good players.

I was placing people. And we had a really high level of success. So then it was that next year or two years down the road where I had all these young recruits and I really struggled. Now I had to develop their foundation, their skill level so they could run all the plays that I wanted to run or that I could run with these older guys.

So that really impacted me. That's when I started asking coaches these questions about teaching and learning. And I learned a lot from Carl. Carl was at BYU when I was at SC. He was recruiting these players that I didn't think were that good. I wasn't recruiting them, but they were becoming national team players in four years.

I took notice. And I could see when we played this team, how much pressure I felt, you know, during the game. His defense and his offense just pressured us.

So I called him and said, Carl, can we sit down and talk? And he became one of my best friends and he became my greatest mentor. Then there was Mike Norman, who I played for.,Those two guys were a lot alike, but they were really different.

What I learned from both of them was. They knew exactly what they wanted to do. They knew how they wanted to do it, and they knew why.

They taught us why it was so important for us to do it that way.

They both had a different philosophy. And they did different things, but their leadership as a coach was really kind of neat.

And then one thing, just a personal thing that I would truly encourage coaches do, and I didn't do a good job of this and I wish I had.

Just to encourage 'em to take more time to enjoy what they're doing. To smell the roses, if you will. I wish I had done a better job of that. We celebrated little successes and motivated people and that was important to me as a teacher.

But we moved on real fast when we accomplished something very good. I was on to the next year if we won the national championship or whatever. I just wish I had enjoyed it more.  It's the only thing I would do a little bit different.

Matias: Great answers, Jim. Last week I talked with Velasco, also for VolleyBrains. And I asked the same question to him.

And he told me, the first thing that you have to do, for sure for coaches that were pro's or that have had college careers. You have to kill the player that you have within. That player persona that you have inside. Because otherwise you'll tell your athletes: Yeah, but this is easy. Let me show you. You take the ball and you show them, how it should be done. But it's easy for you.

And the more easy, and then that connects to the teaching, the more easy it is for you, the more obvious it is to you, the more you have to work at it to conceptualize it. To find insights, to explain everything and to know how to make something being felt to your players. The more easy it is to you, the more you have to work at it to be able to teach it. And that was something so obvious to me. And so logical that I was like, yeah, that's a great insight. Not only true in sports, this is about everything you do, for sure.

Well Matias, that guy is brilliant. There are a lot of good coaches, but he's one of the few that are brilliant.

I studied him and I learned a lot. And as I coached more, I started having a greater awareness and understanding what he was about. One thing he said was: to be the coach your players need you to be. And you could write a book on that.

He was amazing. There's so many things about him. He's a special coach. He is like Beal, McGown, Dunphy. Those guys.

Do you have a particular goal? Maybe a goal that you already reached or a goal that is so hard to reach that it gives you daily motivation?

It's a good question. I think I've gone full circle. What I mean by that is, when I started coaching, it was pretty pure in terms of I just wanted to develop people. I wanted to enjoy the improvement process. I wanted people to become more confident. I wanted people to really work harder and give greater effort every day.

I wanted people to become what they wanted to become, not what I wanted them to become. What they wanted to become and help them through that.

But when we started getting a return and we started winning, it became about meeting these expectations with great regularity. And it got so much harder.

It's hard to explain, but as you know, expectations can become unreliable, almost volatile. Now I'm at a point where, you gotta have a balance there where, you gotta have some expectations. Because if you don't, well, you gotta be careful what you ask for.

I'm back to really helping kids improve, helping a volleyball player becoming a better volleyball player. Whether they're young, they're old, they're mature, people can get better. Human potential keeps growing. It's just way more fun now to just sit back and really get into teaching and help people figure it out.

Help them become more aware of themselves, more aware in the moment of learning and all those things.

I'm back to that simple process and when the wins come, yeah, I'm stoked. It's a good thing. We need to win. But I'm not focused on that at all.

What are bad recommendations you hear about coaching or training volleyball?

(Jim was very adamant to answer this question...I had skipped over it for some reason during our call and we came back to it at the end, hence the references to earlier moments in our call)

You brought this up earlier and it was really nice what you said. You talked about structure. And I just want you to think about this. I thought more about this question than any other question. We started out saying, there's a lot of opinions and you gotta be careful of those opinions. We wanna study facts.

So I thought about this. I hear people say all the time, you've gotta play and you've gotta play. And it's true. If you follow motor learning and greater transfer, and the appropriate regulatory stimuli. Yes, we're gonna play. So we have to play. Most of our practices should be about playing. But in order to take your game to another level, there's gotta be some structure.

Because the bigger the game, the fewer the reps. So can we put some people, in some situations where it's a smaller group, we're controlling the environment, we're regulating the feedback, we're still on the court making the same move with the same speed. There's some transfer, but there's also gonna be some return quickly. And they start to understand.

The way the brain works is they now can dial in and be mindful about what their body's doing.

They can be mindful of the situation, they get to repeat it over and over, for 15 or 20 minutes. And then we go to the game. And now their brain works differently.

They start to understand situations, early cues, how to respond, oh, I'm inside against one blocker, what do I do? And I don't worry about what my body's doing. But at some point when you become an expert, it all converges. You know what your body did in this situation. And what it has to do to respond to this situation.

So I heard this thing that Kobe Bryant said before he passed away about how you have to have structure. You just can't play street ball. You've gotta have structure to elevate your game and then plug it in.

It was exactly what I believed. If we're teaching people how to move. And then teaching them how to see. Then we can have some very explicit methods where we map it out and define everything. And go into the implicit where we're kind of guiding them in their mutual discovery.

So it also increases the speed of learning. And it helps them retain and recall at a faster/higher level.

Now, I hear coaches and club coaches say, we don't have much time. So we just have to play. But you can still divide up your minutes in a way that helps accelerate the learning process. I just wanted to say that to you because you brought up structure.

And then the other thing is. The game is the game. We can learn so much by studying the game.

I'm doing a study right now on recycling and I'm learning a lot about the men's and the women's game and how it's a little different right now.

But you gotta study. You just can't make things up. You gotta test these great ideas, these great intuitions. And see if they're valid or if they violate some of your principles. That to me is a big deal. It was my favorite question. It goes deep into the teaching process, defining your methods. Getting better at your methods. Because your methods influence everything you do.

The most important thing as a coach, is to become a coach that believes in their methods. And of course, you gotta do it the way you need to do it. But make sure they are sound methods. And they're supported and defended by some science and some of the things we believe.

But anyways, I could go on and on about that, but you brought it up so I wanted to respond to it.

Matias: I think in pro club volleyball, what you just said about segmenting the game. So you take one part out of the game to make it more clear, and then you put it back into the game. To augment the comprehension about, what to do in this type of situation.

Well, that should happen more often in pro club volleyball, because coaches mostly are so reactive.

Oh, we lost and we lost because we didn't get enough kill blocks, which is already something rather ignorant to say. Or we had too many blockouts. So this week we have to train our block more. Then by accident you have three kill blocks, or your smaller setter has two stop blocks, and then you think it's fixed.

And then, oh yeah, but we missed a lot of serves. And the next week you're gonna train your serve. You're continiously chasing what's happening, and you're never cementing fundamentals. Of course we're talking pro volleyball, so maybe there's no time or no place for that. But there should always be place for that, because that's the only thing there is. That is the game. Segment it out, and put it back in.

I really loved your answer.

Yeah. I used to call it putting down fires.

The best coaches build a team. They have their big rocks. They know where the team's at and where they want the team to go. They really study what the team needs, what the individual players need. There's individual development. There's a foundation of fundamental centers.

You can build whatever you want if you have a secure foundation. A solid foundation.

I see in 9 out of 10 coaches that instead of building the team with these big rocks, they just are trying to fix things that are broken. Instead of building the team.

You're exactly right. These coaches talk about, you gotta be thinking outside of the box. You gotta be creative. Yeah.

But don't make stuff up.

The richness is from the mindfulness and the return you get from subtle variations of familiar themes. (read this sentence a few times over, I loved this one - Matias)

So that to me is the deal.

Team rules. Were there fixed team rules that you put in place? How did you go about that part of coaching?

As a young coach, I had lots of rules. I learned over time that they weren't helping me. Even though I thought they were important and we defined everything we did.

As I matured, those rules turned into core values and a mission statement. And even that is different by team. Teams evolve, their vibe, their chemistry, their culture evolves over the course of a year. Every team is a little different. Every team has different needs, just like every player.

But then on the other side of that, Matias. When we were on the floor, we had rules. You know, who was gonna take this ball. If there was a question between front row and back row,we wanted back row to take it. If there's a question between back row, we wanted our libero take it.

We had some rules to help us define what we were gonna do and why we were gonna do it.

But the culture thing. The main rule for me was, just make good decisions. Because if you make a decision that hurts you. It's gonna hurt the team.

You're part of this team, that is bigger than you. So we've got to live these core values. And we've gotta learn how to do that.

There was a process we used to develop our culture. It started through individual development, developing roles and responsibilities and duties, expanding those roles. And then being responsible.

People could trust you in doing what you were supposed to do because you were on this team. Not because I like you more and I'm gonna work harder for you. Because I'm on this team, I have a job to do. I have some pride in my work.

But we didn't have rules.

I don't know what I was thinking early in my career, but I sure got away from those rules because they were all broken and it didn't help the team.

According to you, what rule change is necessary? And why would you want to see this rule implemented?

To be honest with you, I never thought about that stuff.

I was right here where my feet were. I wanted to get better today. The rules were the rules I had to adapt to and I had to play within the rules.

I love the game the way it is now. The game is getting played faster. I'm not sure how much we can speed it up in terms of the setting and the serving and the spiking. The setters, like you said, they're better and better.

They can set with tempo on a large range of different passes and keep hitters in rhythm. It's amazing. The setters at the international level are so much better than the college setters.

I think what it boils down to, and maybe this is me as a teacher, but the players are gonna continue to master the skills at a higher level.

It's gonna become an even better game, just like the shooters in the NBA. Steph Curry's doing things that no one else could do. Quarterbacks in the NFL, running backs, it's everywhere. There's always gonna be a variation in identities and I think that's a healthy thing.

But the game is the game. Sometimes I think the question should be: what will never change.

It's still gonna be a left side game, most of the balls are gonna go there. Even when we have these huge opposites. In serving and passing, the correlation to winning is still gonna be huge.

Digging off the net is something that just allows everyone to be better. So there are some things that I don't think will change.

But one thing maybe is. What if we regulate the scoring. Like what's going on in India right now in the pro leagues, they play five games to 15 points so they can put it on tv.

Now you may get so many more points if you win 5-0, or 4-1 or to win the match, you gotta be 3-2. It regulates the game so we can put it on and expose it to more people.

But I don't wanna put a clock on it. I just want scoring to be something where you can put it on TV and do the advertisements and all that stuff.

But I love the game. I just love it so much. I'm afraid that we're gonna make some changes that will screw it up.

Best game you've ever seen. What recent or game from the volleyball vaults did validate once more that volleyball is the greatest sport on the globe.

Well, I know the game. There's one game that had a distinct impact on me. It was when Serbia played Italy in the 2018 Women's World Championships.

Just to set this thing up, I've always believed, I coached men and then I coached women, that the game is the game. The movements are the movements. The eyework is the eyework.

Now there are variations, because lot of times in the women's game there's two hitters against three blockers. In the men's game there's always five. There's different things.

Women will never react as fast as men on the defensive side. And in the offense, because of timing and it being a function of where the hitters are at in their approach relative to when the setter has the ball, the timing and the offenses are the same.

The speed from when the setter releases ball to contact is the same. And I've trained them the same. I talked to 'em different, but I've trained them the same, the movements, all those things.

But when I saw that game, I was blown away. Both teams were in a bunch read. Both teams were getting on the setter really early and had tremendous reaction time.

The movements were comparable, very similar between men and women. There were two physical opposites flying in out of the back row, hammering the ball. There's lots of gap sets, quicks, very few slides. There were fast left side, right side sets.

It was such good volleyball.

And then if you look at the fifth game, I remember it was 7 - 7 and then it got to 9 - 10 and the game was played so well, it was so clean. They were passing off the net. The setters were good, the swings were good, the choices were good types of swings.

There was one overpass and the Italian girl doesn't put it away. I mean, just this one variation and she doesn't put it away to tie up the game. Then there was a tight dig. The setter goes up and sets a ball and it's tight and they net. Italy nets. That's it. It was so close, and it was just a couple plays.

But I remember studying that game and I felt like. Volleyball is volleyball. The girls were powerful. They were fast. It just made me feel really good that the game is the game.

In the United States, there are lots of coaches that say there's men's volleyball and there's women's volleyball. That they are two different games.

Even when I went to Kansas State, we started a swing block and no one was doing it, but it was really good. It made blockers better in the men's game and it was faster.

I had many prominent coaches tell me, no, you can't do it, Jim. You're gonna screw it up. And we did it, and we got better at blocking. We could touch quicks. And we could get outside. And we could be dynamic and we're not in the line of the hitter.

It was just tougher. And our systems were better.

I remember when I watched that match, I was so happy and I said, the game is the game.

There are variations. There will always be, but volleyball is volleyball. And I just was so stoked.

What are the characteristics that you would love to see in your players?

I think there's some things you can see and some things you can't see.

A lot of times we're so attracted to what we see it overrides what the most important thing is. That inside of a player.

I think great coaches learn about their players and they know about that inside of the player. And for sure the greatest I've coached, they had something inside. Of course, you wanna have good arms, you wanna jump well, you wanna have a complete skill level. But then you want to have a big heart.

You want somebody that competes. That's not afraid to take some really good shots.

I always looked for people that understood effort. To me it just boils down to, can you give better effort every day? What prevents you from giving great effort. And can you develop that tolerance day-to-day emotionally, mentally and physically as you go through the season.

And then you know, you have to learn how to recover and rest and taper and do all those things. But can you learn how to really maximize your effort. And do you know when you're giving great effort? A lot of kids think they are, and our job as a coach is to help people give more and commit more.

To me, that's the more important stuff. But I also think some of that you can learn, if you're in a really good learning  environment, you develop your competitiveness to.

I don't know if you like that answer, but...

Matias: No, I liked this. But are you capable to recognize how much effort you're giving? And if you're not, do you know why you're not giving it? Those are essential questions.

Mostly something you learn when it's too late in my opinion, as a player.

You need to be a player who's not afraid to make those challenges and fail and respond to it.

I once heard a Russian coach answered this question, I forget who it was. But they had so many good players and someone asked them the question. "How are you gonna pick 12 players for your national team? In the United States we have about 30 good players, and you only have to pick 12. It's an easier job."

And he said, "I'm gonna look for the people that can adapt to adversity and overcome it. The people who have had those personal victories."

I just really liked that answer. Because it's so hard becoming great that there is a resilience factor. I don't give in, I have to keep going.

Those things are really hard to see though. And it takes time to learn that and bring that out of a person too.

What would your 'best team' look like?

I don't remember all the names and stuff.

Just generally, I want two great pin hitters and maybe a great opposite. The way it's trending right now, the opposite is correlating to a higher level of play right now. But for sure if you have two great pin hitters and an opposite, taking good smart swings. That's important.

Then you gotta have quick hitters and you gotta be able to hit wide quicks and front tight quicks and wide and tight quicks behind. I think you have to have that.

To me, you gotta have a great libero that's gonna pass around 75% perfect. That's really difficult with today's serving, but the best liberos can do that.

Then for me, and that's different than McGown, but I always wanted a great setter. We tutored our setter before and after practice. We want a setter that can locate balls from all over the court, can set the middle third, get the volume up in the middle, and keep teams in a bunch read. And a setter who makes really good choices, by rotation, because every rotation's different by situation and then by personnel.

But then, in college and even with the national team, you get what you get and you gotta develop 'em.

And it's not like in the NFL where you're drafting. No, you have your talent and you've gotta make em better.

And back to your question, I always wanted people that regardless of how good they thought they were, they wanted to get better.

They wanted your help to help them take their game and do things they couldn't do. Not just become more consistent at a current ability, but to learn a new ability.

To be able to hit line, when you couldn't hit line.  To be able to hit off the right front blocker. To do the different things in the different situations you're gonna be in.

So that's a long answer to your question.

Maias: No, no. It's a great answer.

It's always interesting to find out if people open to learn and then to understand, are they really ready to learn? So there's a difference between that to me.

You first need to be open, and then you still need to be ready. It's not because you're open that you are ready, you know?

That to me, that's a big deal.

Because the best players that I've coached, they had that characteristic.

Number one, they knew what they were supposed to do, and I wanted to help them define that. Number two, they were open to learning. And number three, they understood it never got easier.

Those were the things that were really important. But improving and I used to put this quote up for 30 years. I had it on my board. Improving is about learning.

Every player I've ever coached, and many players want to improve. And coaches want to improve. But they don't realize that to improve, they have to learn how to change.

And mindfulness is the key to that. Once you learn how to be mindful about yourself, that's the key to improvement.

Everybody wants to improve. Everybody wants to win. I mean, the will is not enough. You gotta do these things and make these changes.

Velasco used to say: "The first part of winning is that individual battle of making changes."

If you're not changing in practice, you're not winning. You can't just go out on the weekend and win. You gotta learn. And there's a process to learning how to solve problems and do all the things you need to do as a group.

But the first thing is solve your own problems and make the improvement. And that advances into, you gotta make one more play than the opponent. But that doesn't happen early on.

You've gotta start making changes or you're not gonna improve. I think when people become aware of that, then it's a choice. Then you're gonna make a choice because it's just too hard for some people.

If you could have a gigantic billboard anywhere with anything on it — metaphorically speaking, getting a message out to every athlete on the globe — what would it say and why?

Every play, every day. E.P.E.D.

There's a lot to it and it's very difficult. But I wanted my players to approach each play like it had a life of its own. Because one play can influence the match. One play. And you don't know when that play is gonna happen.

It's not human nature to approach things like that. To give your best on every play. To have great focus, great energy, great awareness in this one play.

But that was our motto. Every play, every day. We had to live it.

And then I would say to them. How did I say it? I used to write it on the board.

"If you wanna be a champion, then act like it today." Because hoisting that championship trophy up, it's a little bit of a fleeting moment.

You remember what you went through and you become a champion by developing the habits and the effort every day. It becomes who you are. Regardless of, whether you wanna do it or not, you're gonna do it.

It's a choice. And then that leads me into, the next quote.

"We are what we repeatedly do." Therefore, excellence is not an act. It's a habit. So are we forming the right habits? Are the habits taking shape? Are they too hard to be broken?

So we've gotta be just mindful and conscious of, and aware of all these little things that we're doing. And those little things add up to these big things.

Those would be my little quotes that I would want my players thinking about or my daughter's thinking about, well, people in general also.

How has a failure, or apparent failure, set you up for later success? Do you have a “favorite failure” of yours?

Oh, I have too many.

I think the thing about failure for me and you hear and read in all these books, that you can't think about failure, well, it motivated me. But I also think there's a lot more to it. Because without those little failures, you don't have those personal victories.

Or the overcoming of personal challenges. I think that, to me, is the deal. And if we learn how to do that we develop more confidence in who we are. And it strengthens you and fortifies you. It helps you in everything you do.

So failure, it motivated me. I had too many of them. But I learned from it.

I learned from every one of them. And I reacted and learned how to respond to it. I didn't ever just brush it off. I wanted to cherish it. It was like telling our players in practice: errors are part of learning. And the experts make a great deal of errors in a very narrow field. So I just wanted them to have a right mindset, that they could cherish it.

Now that gets into some, thinking slow and thinking fast. And all those things where we want to go through the phases of...

You know, the cognitive phase, the associative phase, the autonomous phase, and not think at all.

But you need to think about and cherish these errors, learn as much as you can from it. And then have a plan of attack to do it in a better way.

So yeah, failure was a big part of every person's development as a coach and a player.

What are some new things you've gotten into in the last few years.

One of those is just helping coaches.

I learned that I didn't want 'em to do it exactly the way I did it. They had to find out what works for them.

So I changed my process to looking at some situations and asking the question, do you want this person taking this ball? Or do you want that person taking this ball? Or do you want that shot being hit? Or do you want this set being set? Do you want 'em serving like this?

Letting the coach articulate their needs. Some did it very well, some didn't, some didn't care.

And then, we'd go into, okay, if you want them hitting that shot, do you want 'em hitting it in that way? Or do you want 'em passing it that way? If this girl's gonna take the low seam, do you want her doing it like that, or him doing it like that? And we discuss it.

And then they'd eventually ask me, Jim, what did you do? And then I could tell 'em, well, here's what I did, but this is what worked for me, in these conditions, this is what we did.

So you gotta figure out what works for you on a many levels. And this is very serious stuff.

Other stuff. As I've gotten older, I can't work out like I used to. My body just can't do it. I got a bad hip and I can't recover as fast. But I love breaking a sweat and working out, and I wanna keep in shape.

So I'm eating good food. Just better food. Most of it's because of Margaret, my wife, and she helps me with it. But it has changed my life. I'd work out so hard when I was young, I could kind of get away with eating anything. I just wonder, if I'd eaten really good stuff, if I would've been better.

But anyways, better late than never. That's just a habit. Just because I have to. I'm getting old.

What is an unusual thing or a new thing that you love?

Right now, the thing that I love more than anything is watching my daughters play soccer. Now, I'll be honest with you, thank God for Margaret. Margaret helped me become a better husband, a better dad.

I was so into coaching and it's a very selfish profession. The demands are significant on the whole family. So when I retired, it was at the right time, and all of a sudden I got to see my kids play. I've traveled all over the country to watch them play and we've had so much fun.

I love playing golf. And I'm kind of getting good at it. So there's this competitive side and there's this learning side.

And I also get to work with some coaches. I love it. I love being outside and then I love being in the gym, coaching. I still have that. I don't know what it is, but it's just, there's a really special feeling when I'm in the gym helping kids, pushing kids, listening to kids and seeing them grow.

So I don't know if there's anything really unusual about all that.

I'm gonna get back into surfing a little bit. I grew up surfing a lot, used to shape my own boards.

So I wanna do that and get back into that because I love the water.

Talking about focus. We always ask the question what coaches do when they feel overwhelmed or when they feel unfocused. How is your relationship with focus?

I think it's an acquired skill to focus. It's a trait the great ones have. The better the focus, the central focus, the higher the energy.

You have to have focus and energy to learn and to play well. And you have to have it in specific moments. But we all get away from ourselves and we gotta be able to pull ourselves back.

And then that leads into concentration. There is focus. And then over periods, extended periods of time there's concentration. Concentration allows you to see and know. You pick up early cues that allow you to respond a little quicker to a situation.

You gotta have great focus.

Now, my wife would say to me, your focus is your greatest strength and your greatest weakness. I can be so focused on things, that I didn't see anything else. I was unaware. But when it was important to me, I could focus at a really high level, and it really helped me to do a better job.

So you've gotta work on that, like you do anything else. I don't think you need to go talk to a bunch of people.

You gotta know who you are and learn how to focus during practice and know where your mind's at and eliminate all the thoughts.

Your thoughts are tools, do they serve you well? Well, the average person thinks 60000 thoughts a day, and 90% of them are negative.

You've gotta have a singular focus in your thoughts, when you're learning. You can't be all over the place. Yeah, I think I've learned how to do that and it was maybe harder for me than other coaches, but if you're everywhere, you're nowhere. And you gotta know where you're at and be able to stay there with great attention.

So I don't know if that answers your question.

Matias: Being focused is something that comes more natural to you. So you don't really have an issue with being unfocused. If you even can call that an issue. Your thing is more how do I get outside of my focus and try to relax.

That's what I feel that you answered here.

Yes.

Do you have a book that you like a lot? Which lessons did you get out of it?

Well, you mentioned one of 'em, the Walsh book. "The score takes care of itself" is just an excellent book.

But the book that had the most influence on me was the "Servant Leader". It's by James C Sarros. I gotta read it again. I read it every year and I take new things from it every time I read it.

It talks about the difference between managing and leading. Management is what you do, leadership is who you are. It gets into the management side. The management is from the head down. That true leadership is about true commitment and getting people to run through walls and work hard.

Servant leadership is about the player, which I really like. It's not about me. Now you're not their slave and doing everything they want. You're doing what they need.

And sometimes kids need to be pushed a little harder. Sometimes they need a hug. So different things like that.

The book, for me, it talked a lot about authority versus power. And that authority is more cooperative, and I think that's important. Leadership is doing the right thing when you don't want to do it, and it's a little bit like your character.

The book defines it, and gives really good examples of it, and how to go about it. It's important in all aspects of your life.

He talks about the tests of leadership, 'do people really raise their game under your leadership'? Are they ready to go? If a player plays for you, are they prepared for life or are you just letting them get into something that they can't handle? It's just like a big moment in a game. Are we preparing them to get ready for these moments?

Well, there's a lot to that, and the leadership to me is the deal.

So the 'Servant Leader'. I heard John Wooden talk about it and I read it, and there's two Servant Leaders. You gotta get the right one.

It still influences me to this day.

Jim, you are one of not that many coaches that not only have trained both women and men teams, but you were also successful in doing so. Can you talk a bit about that?

Well, society screws it up. I think in coaching both men and women, I've learned that, yeah, there are some differences, but there are some similarities.

For instance, women can work as hard as men, sometimes harder. A woman will get done with a workout and then go on the StairMaster and grind. So you gotta be careful with that. Women can compete. If it's important to them, they can compete as hard as men.

Women can stay on task, especially in really tough moments. Where sometimes men will get emotional. They'll wanna punch the guy through the net and they can get off task. Women can stay on task. Women can be leaders.

But women are different than men. And all women are different, and all men are different.

And you've gotta know their needs. So you gotta talk to 'em based on what they need and no two people are exactly the same.

But about the movements of the game. We study biomechanics and you gotta know about that. We study exercise physiology. We study motor learning. Well, they apply to men and women. The movements of the game are the movements of the game.

We wanna get people to move efficiently with power and get from point A to point B as quickly as they can with balance and rhythm. And these movements are proven and they work for both men and women. The eyework is the same. If you want reaction time, it's about central focus.

It's not periferal focus, that slows you down. At the end of the day, you could say something to a group of men, and they could take it totally different than saying the exact same thing to a group of women.

And so you just gotta be really careful of what you say, how you say it, and just understand the group you're talking to.

The other thing is this. And intuitively, you would think it's the opposite, but I like to measure things.

To me, what gets measured gets managed. What gets managed gets done.

You know, you can be easily influenced, because we have a limited ability to process complex information. You can't really know how people perform in a long practice. With all the swings and all the stuff that's going on, you're gonna be selective in what you remember.

So I wanted to stat everything. We did a cauldron and a lot of people told me, there's no way it will work because there are cultural differences in men and women as you build your team.

But it really helped our women's team because as we measured things and managed things, they knew it was fair.

We all got the same number of reps. We rewarded the people that were performing. It motivated learning and they were fair.

It wasn't like, Jim just likes you more than me. She earned it and she got there and took the job, and was a starter until somebody else beat her out.

Men didn't always operate that way. A lot of coaches told me, Hey, there's no way this will work with the women's team.

And it really helped the whole culture of our team and the growth of the individuals. So anyways, there are differences.

Extra:

In doing my preparation for the video call with Jim I've watched many of his practice sessions.

We went a bit deeper into what caught my own eye.

Clips mentioned:

"The set is not based on the hitter, we're gonna institutionalize the set."

What makes and not makes a setter:

Torque position:

The Giba:

Thank you, Jim.



