We call this the hanger drill.
And well, let's let it play a little bit more.
But you saw a serve.
Then you saw now a system toss.
And then you saw another serve.
And I think you'll see this team wave through.
This is a really good one that you pointed out, like drill-wise.
So we picked this drill up from the University of Alberta, actually.
They had a different name for it.
But it's a great drill to do with, like, multiple teams.
And you can change the parameters.
So, like, on this drill, we're doing serve, out-of-system serve.
So the side that's, you know, basically rotating through is what we call in the hanger.
And so in order for them to stay, a lot of times they either have to win two or all three plays in terms of that,
in terms of what we might be doing for the action that time.
So you're going to see Kersh toss.
They serve.
And then Kersh tosses this kind of out-of-system ball.
So a lot of things are going on.
We're working on triple on the defense side.
We're working on attacking on the offense side, set placement in terms of that coverage,
all the things that kind of come along with that at the same time.
But the reason the drill, I think, works so good is because it keeps things moving pretty fast.
You've got three teams.
So that means you're working in 24 guys there pretty fast.
We put a timer on the drill of, like, 20 minutes, give or take.
And then the centers keep track of their interceptions.
Individual team scores.
You know, and if you win all three, you get two points.
If you win two, you get one point.
And so there's lots of live action play where we can kind of coach some different things as it goes on a little bit.
So you see these guys kind of bounce off.
So right now, the hangar side is a side that's serving and then out-of-system.
So it's really tough to stay in it because you've got to win a couple points there.
And two of them, you're live serving in terms of that.
So I made it a little bit.
And we're challenging on that side.
Sometimes we do it where if you're in the hangar side, maybe you're receiving all three balls.
And so it's a little easier to stay in the hangar from that side in terms of that.
And we call it a hangar, I think, because we're Lewis and we fly planes, you know.
So probably make up whatever name you want to in terms of that.
Oh, exactly.
No, you can really create a nice, like, a good amount of animosity also.
Like, if you have a team that can stay there for two or three rounds.
Yeah, you rack up.
You guys are getting cooler.
Yeah, exactly.
I always tell my assistants, too, it's like if I'm on one side, one of you has to be on the other side.
They always have to be balanced.
So they have to pay attention to what I'm doing.
They can never all three be on my side.
One of the other things is using these drills, like, will give the assistant coaches tasks, too.
Like, hey, you're on eye sequencing.
Can you watch the blockers and what they're doing with their eyes?
You know, maybe, hey, you're watching servicemen.
You're seeing them.
We've been teaching some split-step stuff with some of our passers.
The next drill we're doing, we call it Zondron.
And so it's a category drill.
You know, you heard of Yahtzee or things like that.
And so you've got, like, three categories here.
It's like if you get two kills or if you get two aces or if you get two middle bit kills,
you get to stay on the court.
So the game's at 25.
There's three teams.
And so basically, it's a mini game with these categories, whoever gets the first one.
But if somebody gets to seven before you get one of the categories,
then we kind of do this sudden death game to stay on the court.
And so that's the scope of the game.
And so it's really a category game.
You can choose any categories you wanted on things you were working on.
And you can choose the volume, too.
But, again, it's another nice preseason.
Three-team drill that you're still competing and focusing on some things from that standpoint from there.
So the best, I think, to approach this exercise is just, like, go for the double immediately or, like, how are they approaching that?
Well, I think it's the setters paying attention, like, a little bit for, hey, I want to run some middle bit stuff if I can.
If the passes are there, put me in a good spot.
And then I think outside of that, they're just trying to focus on putting the hitters in good.
So when they kind of run the offense.
But, you know, I think one of the things that I think we've struggled with, and you see it right here, is we just weren't serving the ball well enough.
We've gotten a little bit better in the past two or three weeks.
So I think when we play this the next time, we kind of miss instituted kind of a miss serve thing.
It's such a fine line.
And, you know, this watching at all levels, like, you serve lollipops.
You're getting the ball, you know, down your throat at our level.
Do you know what I mean?
But you've got to serve some confident pressure, too.
That was a nice serve by Tyler Simpson and not a great track by Dan, I think.
And Tyler's a big 6'10 middle that certainly has a nice float.
You know what I mean?
You can put some pressure.
No, it's really like I just said.
Like, if you do these kinds of exercises and you have some guys or cranking the ball and just acing or missing serves, you just take all the rhythm out of the exercise.
You know, like, it's not fun.
It's fun for nobody.
Except for the guy making the aces, of course.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Let's see how these guys.
So one of the things we were training was we're trying to work on a little bit of split step passing.
We got these three guys passing.
And not bad there.
So maybe.
Now, can you rewind that again in slow mo?
I wish I can do slow mo.
I wish we could rewind, though, right on the pass.
Yeah, I can.
I can try to aim for.
Yeah, we see these three guys.
I'll prep.
Yeah.
So this is like the small prep step and then small prep.
And then you see these guys split a little bit.
I think it's what I even around the game long enough.
Like, you see different fads going out.
You think about 10, 15 years ago, everything passed left, passed left.
You know what I mean?
In terms of that.
And so, like, I certainly think we're training kind of the X pattern passing right now.
Versus a plus pattern.
So what I mean by that is, can we, you know, get the ball out in front of us or open our
hip and get it away from us?
Our midline, do you know what I mean?
In terms of that.
And the same time with that, you know, we've been training, you know, hey, if guys aren't
actively firing their feet, how can we help them fire their feet?
And that's where kind of either a minimal prep step to a split step or what does that
look like?
And so we've been playing around with it.
And the fall is a good time to do that for us.
It's like, which guys might execute this pretty well for us?
Which guys, um, maybe it's not the best thing.
And I think that's an important thing.
Sometimes as a coach, it's like, there's a lot of different training methods and different
ways guys innately or athletes fire their feet or get themselves ready.
And there are some things that work really well.
And then some things, Hey, you got to keep an eye out.
And maybe we can tweak that a little bit for that guy and make him a little bit better
and really get the best out of him instead of him continuing to do something where he
might get frustrated.
Uh, and it may not work the best for him.
So.
Yeah, exactly.
And it's, it's, yeah, it's, then you really need your, your assistant guys to, to manage
all that with like all these guys, all these players.
Yeah.
It's something.
Yeah.
The other one I see, maybe if we can pick up, um, hopefully he serves it in for us.
You know, uh, we've been doing, um, our middles are split stepping certainly on their pin
to pin moves and we'll see kind of what this looks like and what type of pass we got.
Nice.
That's good.
Yeah.
Well, we'll try to watch the middle on the other side and kind of, he's a senior middle
for us.
Number nine.
Yep.
Number nine.
I said he wore a Jersey for us today.
Well, I didn't, I wasn't a good one to show.
No, no, really.
Let's be together.
Good big now.
So.
Exactly.
Okay.
Group on the other side is probably a little bit older.
Girl.
I say older, but junior, sophomore.
Yeah.
Okay.
Very.
Yeah.
Let me get a little bit there.
And go, he's a state in the middle, but we did started split stepping with our middles
quite a bit.
Um, and, uh, last spring, the fall, um, we did a little bit of split stepping with our
middles.
We started there before we touched the passers in terms of that.
The group's done a nice job of delineating it to a certain degree, but then it's figuring
out how to do it in the right phases.
Cause I think as middles, there's a lot of different scenarios.
You get caught in an overload.
I'm shuffling versus an out of system where I might split, split the crossover and what
that might look like a little bit.
Yeah, I know.
I guess, I guess that kind of splits up what he just did.
It's only possible if you have the ball.
Let me think about feet.
Like the ball.
It needs to be like four, four feet off the net.
Like if it's better, it was like a plus plus reception.
You do that.
You just get lost.
You don't have time anymore.
Like even in, in these kind of out of system situations, there are some, there were some
international middles that still do like a small, like bounce at the spot just to get
into rhythm.
Yeah.
So if we talk about.
Just mentioned like this, this group was a bit older with some, but yeah, it's on.
Well, now you got that.
Well, now you got that on the other side, you got the younger group and then this group's
about a second year group, the young group.
So the older group's actually off right now.
So.
Okay.
So it's not, it's not like you're balancing, you're looking to balance groups out or it's
more like it just.
I think in the fall when you see, you do see like, it was kind of this starting group.
The outside position is rotating a little bit.
So for us, um, our main setter though, like I said, that group's out right now, but our
main setter, Tyler, um, is usually kind of with that front group and then we got a couple
of young setters.
And so, um, we do have a Bulgarian kid right here, uh, middle back.
He's a freshman.
We have that.
We have a Norway kid.
Uh, see if that kid pops on the second.
That's good.
Here.
This is, uh, uh,
a little bit of an older group or the, you know, working to be a starting group, but
we do a lot of switching around in the fall to plug in guys in and out and seeing how
they, how they do a little bit.
So,
well, there you go.
A little trickery, uh, funny how you've seen that trade over the past couple of years.
I've seen it.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
down and picking the ball off otherwise you're not getting your arm to and that stuff and so
uh Hunter's gotten a little better the past week or two but he was struggling with that in the
beginning which we typically see with our young guys so just so you know this is like I gotta
know this like October 18th because I feel like we're way better now in a month than what we thought
that's of course like you know you have to you have to pick your time to do this kind of like
videos you know like no it's good it's it's for sure not about it's for sure not about showing
perfection because then oh no I know yeah but I think when I take a snapshot and I'm watching I'm
like oh I think we're a little better now because we've had a couple play dates too since then
but that's super positive you know if you've seen the difference for the last three weeks on yeah
me and sac are talking about
serve right now um he's been working on hand contacts he's got a nice floater moves quite
a bit and just it's okay if he he doesn't have to be tricky when he does it he can kind of face
where he's going so so rewind a little bit
right before the triple this is good so one of the things we started to work early in the season on
with our trip
and blocking triple blocking stuff was kind of can we get in rhythm this group does a pretty
nice job right there kind of working together timing well getting in rhythm uh and putting
themselves in a pretty good spot yeah our left front can be a little tighter and right kind of
dives in but certainly early in the season I like the timing and the rhythm uh we push triples quite
a bit in medium system stuff for sure out of system but you know we're going to have to get back to that
uh medium system we really work to get better at it we try to keep blocking pretty tight uh unless
we're kind of releasing on a main guy in system so this is good to show again here real quick
so go back we talked about the split step a little bit
Nico or lavero's been really good about training with it you see him prep and then get a nice so
sounds good this we ran this able so we like this set in row one you know we get this we attack this
Lane this guy come pick it off it's really nice so yeah like if you're sitting it's consistently
there to five like it's it's yeah you you will have no the middle has to follow him and then
if the man follows him it's all open over there so
so freeze here go back
so rewind a little bit so now freeze so we're big on this you gotta see the middles
or that the middles but you see all the blockers they've all got hand pulls uh so we've got
systematically or a middle's kind of saying hey I'm committing the pins will be like whether I'm
releasing you know or you know so
do a nice job of systematically and as they go from here you see them put all their arms up on
their heads and so we're consciously not screening illegal but at least putting ourselves in a
position to kind of you know hey the server can use these lanes in terms of making a little bit
more difficult for the passers and stuff those are all the things that we look for I keep thinking
so it's like need to be making conscious calls we need to be working together so
he's working on cleaning up his crossover mirrors and so I'm pretty sure it was a dialogue
there's a pretty nice job on that one so if you go back
he's been working on that so
he gets himself in a good spot
crossover and good finish on his left hand over the net with his right hand so
um her middle had a little bit of a late close which is nice too so
I guess we'll save our middle split steps here too yeah split step into a shuffle so that's what
you're talking about with our middles a little bit some of them are split stepping into a
shuffle or split stepping into a crossover and I think working with both of them sometimes different
are better in different situations it's been a big focus medium system out it's just been a pretty
big focus with us with this group i think when you innately have maybe the big physical guys that are
you know touching above 11-6 those guys have a little bit easier time we have some guys that
are working to get there aren't quite get there yet and so i think um you know we got to be real
good with our edge swings real good with our feet up and down and uh using our our mechanics and
our technique in a good way to put ourselves on a good position was point score so i think the
teams you got to pass and serve at a level where you're not competing at our level that's just key
with anything but i think the teams that can find ways to score out a system and to take those
swings and in tough situations put themselves in a pretty good spot at least my best teams
over the years how the coach over there has a speed gun behind him i was about to say the same
thing like how you guys are go how do you guys go about that and is it something like you you
look at the team and you're like oh i'm not going to do that i'm going to do that i'm going to do that
you look at the averages or you're aiming at a certain speed we're aiming at a certain speed i
don't know i think um so the other thing we just got a couple weeks ago um uh stalker sports we
got a a mounted speed gun on a tripod with a screen that's on the side of the video camera
and it's up sitting up in a window that was a good run there so um the guys see it all the time
i think it's a mile per hour too fast but that's okay but what it does is it creates just like
hey can i hit this range of the upper 50s 60s on a consistent basis and put some pressure on teams
and then from a service you standpoint am i getting better about passing and managing what i need to
and uh putting the passes where i need to uh at the same time and i think it's been a big focus
so far so i like that i like the speed gun stuff i like the the purpose of it i like the guys having
some idea about where they're at what they're trying to work on and we have a couple green light
guys guys that it's like hey you know we can you can go back and get after it but the other thing
is about movement sometimes it's just important to speed can i can i chop a ball and in zone one
and tail it off a little bit or can i tail it to uh we call it zone four but it'd be zone five
doing to me a little bit in terms of that but it's like hey can we move these balls with different
depth and speeds because that really puts as much challenge on servicing as the 65 mile an hour bomb
does
actually just last weekend we we released a practice video with a with a belgian champions
league team and his coach yeah he was also like his morning practice was the bulk of the morning
practice was serve five balls inside the court of course they were only like with four guys serving
that's why like i call off seeing practice tape in a huge ball with four guys actually doing
something so that's that's the context so don't understand me wrong here and uh yeah their aim was
put five serves in at
your your gate velocity you can you can be above but you cannot go under the baseline you know like
if if you go if you like if you don't miss and it's under your baseline speed okay it's a wash
you just continue serving but if you miss of course you're back to zero and that can be like
from a mental point of view that practice can be debilitating to say the least oh yeah yeah i might
have to start with three on that if i did five i might be there too i only get a two hour two and
a half hour wind so
no of course those are pros you know but but even for them you see sometimes he told me like
sometimes i just have to like make them stop because they have to wait afterwards you're like
i cannot kill those guys mentally also um but they have the same system i think the same that you just
mentioned i think it's nice to know nice to have the day and they like it yeah of course so it's
about keeping things a little bit fun too if a guy hits 68 or 9 or 70 the whole group's getting
fired up so it's like um
i think there's some good pieces with that no no exactly and that's the fun thing also that's the
context you know this is a protein you're paid good money to perform you know yeah and you can
use the same tools but for a different reason just like to get a little bit of testosterone going
why not
nice transition run let's go back and watch that so
i've been working on uh when we block the outside pin um these guys get a nice touch
he comes straight back and he puts himself in a position to run a what we call is a six but
would be a back one so this is a nice series like
on the defensive side at least like these guys get set read good touch here
like i'm not lands turns
finds a short transition it's a three-step move and gets on the ball fast so um we've been working
like our middles are transitioning usually to a back one or a front one on the front pan and then
when we're on the back pin they transition to a gap and we've worked in what we call a little bit
of a two which is kind of like a floating ball away um and it's pretty systematic in transition
that way our vic route guys kind of know what's coming at them and they're going to be able to
really that makes it a little bit nicer in terms of that if we go back to that play again
we can kind of see what our our big guy does
i'm not sure if this one or the one before yeah that was the one before i think it's
right before this he misses yeah it's this one yeah all right yeah
i'll i'll press pause when they touch the bottom block
so right there yeah absolutely
he's playing the ball probably he's out our middle going this guy digs it
to see if he he would come for a front big sort of spacing is pretty good
just in terms of having four attackers in different lanes
which puts some pressure on the defense on the other side for sure to reset
so to be clear he talked about because of course like internationally and like everywhere like these
uh what's the word the nomenclature is look at me you're using these fancy words um so if you if you
talk about it too it's like a ball between a one and a and a gap so it's like a slower ball like
moving away from the from the center yep exactly so you kind of see a lot of middles running those
drift routes right now um and a lot of times that drift mount starts from a spaced off ball
where they're and i called we call that a two in our gym so it's kind of a spaced off one
but with our normal two we're just up and down or not fading towards the center or fading away
uh so it allows uh some gap space in there between the center and where the middle is
attacking right there from that standpoint we worked on it quite a bit just recently too and so
but first we were just doing gaps when we were blocking the opposite
uh because it just kept it easy so we were kind of we slowly turned the page give them another
option
here and there but i think it just made the routes easy and clean when you block the front pin it's
one or back one when you block the back pin it's a gap and it made it nice and easy
so just looking at your practice and now they have a different shirt on so now it's easy but
you don't have those guys you know you all have like pretty large guys
yeah uh spiking types you know like some more technical receivers but you don't have these
really like japanese kind of style players which in the end a lot of women team have women's team
have these players that
they can only play in in this college environment they will never be
professional yeah anyway no we we don't you're right so like and it's just because of you know
middle's got to be able to serve like we always talk about when we're our middle is like you got
to be able to point score and if you're a floater you're you got to miss less than 10
can you have your point scoring you know around 40 percent
if you're a jump score jump server can you keep your air rate under 15 and point score about 40
so we've got some metrics for the guys that we try to tell them that they're working on and even in
practice we keep stats on everything and we have some metrics for the guys where it's like can you
keep your air rate under 18 or things like that we always kind of do this too right like if we got
three teams playing they usually huddle and they'll talk a little bit they talk about what's
going on and you know and so that usually happens at the most of any drill sometimes
coaches will get in and kind of do that a little bit visit with the guys and so
