===== SESSION: https://volleybrains.com/luka-slabe/ =====

----- VIDEOS -----
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cDI7T95fqTg

----- TEXTO -----
6. Luka Slabe:' We make sure we do a good job on our side of the net, before we worry about the opponent.'

Hi readers, this week we have Team USA Women's Assistant coach and NC State Head Coach Luka Slabe on volleybrains.com.

Luka has coached many different levels and teams. Slovenian Champions League teams (I met Luka in 2012 while he coached ACH Volley Ljubljana), the Slovenian Men's national team, assistant coach of the BYU Men's program...

Many different experiences that he didn't let go to waste. Enjoy his answers below. (and check the clip at the end of the article)

Luka, why and how many years ago did you decide to commit to being a professional volleyball coach? What pushed you towards that decision?

I was very fortunate to play for some outstanding coaches at Brigham Young University (USA) in my college career.

Carl McGown, Hugh McCutcheon, and Troy Tanner all Olympic gold medalists. It became like an addiction to observe these coaches, how they have approached the game, taught, and analyzed the game.

Their unconditional love for the game and sharing their passion with people surrounding them, players, and peers are the most intriguing things.

Once I got infected, I realized I also could impact and help volleyball players get the best out of themselves.

What advice would you give yourself as a starting coach? An advice that is so clear and logic for you now, but that you had to develop over the years.

Take a deep breath before you speak. Surround yourself with loyal people and people who are smarter than you are. Never go to bed with a pain in your stomach.

Do you have a particular goal as a coach? Maybe a goal that you already reached or a goal that is so hard to reach that it gives you daily motivation?(and some healthy stress :-))

Calling my job a passion is the biggest achievement of all.

Not even one day in the last 25 or so years that I have spent playing volleyball or coaching volleyball has felt like a workday.

Every day is a big challenge though, and getting just a little bit better every day is a winning hand for me. Maintaining the urge to keep learning is essential to me.

These are the reasons that keep me at peace, keeps my sleep at ease, and keeps my body healthy.

More to come!

The future of volleyball, how will the game evolve according to your opinion? Or what are you hoping for that the game will look like in a couple of decades?

The game is becoming faster, and volleyball players, both male and female, are more physical than ever before.

I think this is the trend we will continue to see in the future. Eventually, we will make some adjustments to the game's rules, court dimensions, net height, landing or take-off zone of the attacker or server, or similar adjustments.

We might see some changes put in place already after Tokyo or Paris Olympics.

Observing fundamentally sound players and how they apply their techniques to the game and its demands is the beauty of this sport.

According to you, what rule change is necessary in the future? And why would you want to see this new rule implemented?

It is not a secret that the serve game is an entirely different beast on the Men's side than on the Women's side.

On the Men's side, the serve error percentage is double or more than on the Women's.

When watching a Men's game, there is often not a lot of volleyball played due to those errors. It would be wise to find ways to limit those errors somehow, to make the game more appealing for our fans.

I am not sure if not letting the server land in the court would help limit those errors, maybe the ones that fly deep. I don’t have a solution yet on how to limit the serve errors that end up going into the net.

(Matias here: a future article with Giovanni Guidetti focuses on potential solutions, more to come...)

Why not ask a silly question also, we had so many serious ones. :-) So, you are Dr. Frankenstein and have the ability to put together the world's most performing volleyball player. Which  characteristics would he/she have.

Can read the game, anticipate, and react “supersonically” fast to the events on the court.

Has a capacity of getting 1% better every day, without complaining :-)

Can receive the serve 60% In System and Serve opponents out of the System 50+ % of the time, every time we ask him/her to do so.

She/He can kill 60% of all the balls in Z4 and Z2 while committing almost no errors.

Is willing to share a spotlight with her/his teammates. Can dr. Frankenstein do that? :-)

Bonus: stay healthy all the time. With a current CEV and FIVB schedule only with the Dr. Frankenstein player this might be possible, haha.

When preparing a new game (next weekend), how does your general approach look like?

When putting together a defensive plan, I sample 3-4 of the most relevant, recent matches of the opponent we are about to play.

I will review the video and identify the weakest passers. How does passing effect an outside hitter and his/her hitting efficiency?

I study an opponent's setter tendencies based on the setter call and the quality of the reception.

What are the setter's decisions when it's 'do or die' time. I also pay close attention to the setter's movement and things he/she gives away before he/she sets the ball.

I take a lot of notes, keep track of numbers manually. Later I compare my findings and numbers to all the fancy worksheets our analysts put together. I trust my eye the most; later on, I check my work with other data available at my disposal.

I will analyze attacker tendencies and determine what to show our players. And much more!

Did you ever change your approach? Why did you change and was the outcome beneficial?

I am a true believer that 'Less is More' and 'Simple is better than Complex'.

Throughout the years, I have eliminated a lot of data to review before heading to the match.

I only analyze the data that significantly impacts the game and help me make some quick adjustments during the game.

The most significant adjustment I have made in the last few years is keeping our game plan extremely simple, to the bare minimum.

The player has a very limited capacity to memorize information we provide.

Coaches like to think players can learn all the data, lines, charts, tactical variations and execute the plan at the same time.

Well, we are wrong! Knowing how the human brain stores information, and operates with it under stress, we use only the most critical information in our game plan.

What is an unusual habit or an absurd thing that you love?

I love gummy bears.

I am super annoyed when people are late.

I have strict game day routines (Lift weights, shower, light lunch & coffee, review game plan, go to the battle!)

How has a failure, or apparent failure, set you up for later success? Do you have a “favorite failure” of yours?

"I hate losing more than I like winning", that is a quote I live by.

I always try to find things we did well, something that we worked on the week leading to the game, regardless the outcome of the game.

If I can see an improvement, I am satisfied.

Failure is a compass that keeps us on track and grounded, keeping the areas we need to improve highlighted.

Every week I ask myself and my staff if we are doing the right things the right way.

Measuring and reporting what you are working on and always having a good practice plan in place is key. We welcome failure!

Do you have a book that you like a lot? Which lessons did you get out of it?

Talent is overrated by Geoff Colvin.

He successfully puts on trial traditional and ancient thinking of how someone with natural born, super talent is the only one that has access to success.

Science tells us that talent isn't specific, innate (born with) talent, nor is it plain old hard work.

Great read for the ones that are willing to take a deep breath, test and question for a moment, what have they learned so far in their careers.

Most of us coaches, struggle with that. Learning is hard, change even harder.

What is one of the best or most worthwhile investments you’ve ever made?

Learn and practice how to be consistent, disciplined, and efficient with the time on your hands.

Invest in relationships.

Never forget that your biggest fans are waiting for you back home, your family.

What advice would you give to a smart, driven young coach about to enter the “professional coaching world”?

You know very little, keep learning, never stop, fill the gap.

Leave your home (comfort zone), go out, and struggle. Things always fall in place if you truly want them. Listen to your heart and do not rationalise everything.

If it feels right, DO IT!

A follow up to the last question. Maybe even more important, what advice should they ignore? What are bad recommendations you hear about coaching or training volleyball?

There are a million and some drills. It is not about drills. There is no magic drill. Most coaches think it's about drills.

There are just a few strong principles and coaching methods to make your team better and improve players. Discover and learn those.

There are always "popular/cool things" coaches and teams do, but most do not stand long and have minimal impact on the growth of your team.

Do not fall and lose your head for those. "The good thing about science is that it's true whether or not you believe in it." Neil deGrasse Tyson (one of my favorite quotes).

Is there a rule change that you want to see turned back?

No, not really. Volleyball has made some good strides forward in the last 20-25 years.

Rally scoring, the introduction of the Libero, changes to the ball, challenge review, and more. All this has made our game better and more thrilling to watch.

If you could have a gigantic billboard anywhere with anything on it — metaphorically speaking, getting a message out to every athlete or coach on the globe — what would it say and why? It could be a few words or a paragraph.

One of many, but it would fit the billboard nicely.

4 WILLs

It WILL be difficult

It WILL take time

It WILL require sacrifice

It WILL be worth it

In the last five years, what new belief, behaviour, or habit has most improved your life?

Be consistent about what you are doing—no monkey brain.

Create a work environment where winning or losing/failure, is the best type of feedback.

Do not derail if things are not going your way, stay the course, do not panic.

When you feel overwhelmed or unfocused, or have lost your focus temporarily, what do you do?

Go exercise, goof around with my coworkers (go waste some of their time), or have a good cup of coffee.

Thanks Luka for your insights!

Check out the clip below on Luka's high energy approach, the importance of correct technical representations/demonstrations and the importance of developing great people, which comes before making great athletes.

See you next week in your mailbox.✌️👍

Matias



