===== SESSION: https://volleybrains.com/kirsten-bernthal-booth/ =====

----- VIDEOS -----
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Qo6Em7bdF5g
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vhlvAPLuF10
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Q5BBtqmtcBw
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TBUINjM9Kp4
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZFHZ-3cshr4
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jWpJknKARRU
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-kBBsRxcnr0
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=K-G-M06ucCU
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vYXm5jjDbWk
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zdi2ZJBRjD0
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GKzDIbGp0DM
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=75VlY2xl9MY
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8XzSE-V4crY
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2hK2s5w8nJc
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZIBH4sDpFHg
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ifBSQh5Tylk
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WRzuJ_BVfMg
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4sV43vplKIs

----- TEXTO -----
60. Kirsten Bernthal Booth: My 'why' in coaching is to help women grow.

Kirsten Bernthal Booth has been building Creighton's volleyball program for the last 20 years, developing it into one of the top programs (appearing in the AVCA’s Top 25 poll each of the last 10 years).

Under her guidance Creighton reached 11 of the last 12 NCAA Tournaments and has won an unprecedented eight straight BIG EAST regular-season titles.

We had an extended and insightful talk with coach Booth.

Kirsten goes over a lot in this Masterclass:

How she had to develop her own coaching demeanor

What her ultimate goals are in coaching

How her program goes about developing a tight knit team

How she handles herself before, during and after games (wins and losses)

The use of visualization and mindfulness during their season

And so, so much more.

There are 18 video clips and over 7000 words in this article. Sit down, grab a coffee and go through all of it at your own pace. Enjoy!

Before we get this started a big thanks to Kirsten for her availability.

Kirsten, when did you decide to commit to being a volleyball coach? What pushed you towards that decision?

Yeah, I don't think it was a conscious decision of: this is what I'm gonna do. I played Division II volleyball out of college. And still loved the game.

So I went to University of Iowa as a volunteer and was getting my master's degree. I actually thought I wanted to be on the academic side of higher education, a dean or a president or something.

And I just kind of fell in love with coaching.

I finished my master's and I helped at Iowa for a year, I'd done some high school coaching on the side. And then when I was done, I started looking for coaching jobs.

So I guess it must have been during that timeframe while I was finishing up my master's degree that I decided I did wanna coach.

But I always tell people, I mean now I'm in it, and it's definitely been my career. But there were many years that I thought, well, I'll do this for a while and we'll see what I wanna do.

I thought when I got into coaching that I wanted to be an administrator. And that I'd move into athletic administration at some point, maybe I will down the road.

But I've loved coaching. And I always say this to people. I think a lot of times people think you either can do it or you can't do it.

I feel like I really have developed over the years. I made lots of mistakes and things that I would do differently now.

And will sometimes talk to former players and say, gosh, I didn't handle that well, and things like that.

But I think if you hit a point that you figured it out, it's about the time you should get out of it.

What advice would you give yourself as a starting coach? An advice that is so clear and logic for you now, but that you had to develop over the years.

I think a big thing when I was young was... I tried to emulate other coaches. A lot of coaches go through that. You saw a coach that you respect or maybe you didn't even like the coach all that much, but that's all you know.

And I did that a lot early in my coaching. And that could be from how I trained. I did the exact same thing my college coach did until someone said, Hey, why are we doing this?

And then demeanor. What I learned was, a lot of college coaches yell and scream a little bit and that was really tough for me.

That's not my natural demeanor to do that. So I try to do that a bit and some of my old players will say, yeah, we'd laugh at you whenever you tried to yell at us. Because we knew you couldn't yell.

So I had to figure out other ways to be who I am. But still hold players accountable.

Because obviously accountability is gonna be big. But maybe it would be, a ball drops on the floor and rather than yelling at them, the team knows that we run to the wall and back or something like that.

So there's still accountability, but it might be in the vein of what feels comfortable to who I am.

What are bad recommendations you hear about coaching or training volleyball?

Well, I'm a believer there's lots of ways to train, there's lots of ways to coach.

What I don't like is when people think the way they're doing it is the only way it can be done. I can train someone's blocking footwork and they can be successful. And then you can come in and train a totally different way and they can be successful.

So I think being open to having different ideas. The same way with your demeanor. We've got coaches here that are beloved by their athletes and they're volatile. But you know what? They build relationships with their players and be there consistent.

I think regardless of what your personality is, what players struggle to handle is when they don't know who you're gonna be.

So if I go into the gym this afternoon at practice and suddenly start attacking a kid. But maybe our basketball coach could do that any day of the week. Because his players know that's how he communicates. It's totally different.

So again, I just think consistency is key.

And then being open to recognize the way you do it is not necessarily the way everyone does it. And that's okay.

Do you have a particular goal? Maybe a goal that you already reached or a goal that is so hard to reach that it gives you daily motivation?

Well, I think there's on court goals for sure. The best we've done here at Creighton is we've made an Elite Eight. And that was several years ago. So from an on court perspective, we wanna go further in the NCAA tournament. That's the big thing here.

The Big East is really a good league and we kind of duke it out with Marquette. And we've been fortunate to win it a lot of years in a row. We shared the title this year and so that's always a goal.

And then for me, my 'why' in coaching is developing women. So I never wanna lose sight of why I'm doing this. It's about the journey.

It's about doing things the right way, working hard, taking all the right steps.

And then this year for instance, we go in as a 13 or 14 seed in the NCAA tournament and our all-American setter gets a concussion. We find out the day we are gonna play, that she can't play. That sucks. Right? And we lose in five against a good Auburn team.

I was in a depression for a long time. But we actually just had our banquet last week and I said it was one of my favorite journeys.

And at some point, that's what it's about for me.

It's about taking a group, trying to get them on board, people buying into roles. Thinking about the team more than themselves.

All these things that I think make a great team. And then sometimes things go your way, and then sometimes things don't. And this was a year that at the end it didn't.

But it doesn't take away from what my ultimate reason of coaching is. To build these young women. And we had just a phenomenal group of young women. So I never wanna lose sight of that 'why'?

I think if I get too preoccupied on the winning side. I could lose that. Right? That's when you could start to cheat or you start not caring about them as humans. It becomes a transactional relationship and I never want that to be part of the Creighton program.

In one of our more recent Masterclasses with Kevin Hambly we talked about how he wanted to integrate their freshmen as quick as possible. What are some things that you guys do?

Well, I think the low hanging fruit that we do is, we've got something that we've developed over the years called the Jay's Way. And that evolves every year. We read it with the team, we go through it.

We're actually considering making it more technical. But right now it's still on paper. That's the first day of preseason and it talks about what Creighton volleyball is. From things like, not skipping class, to how we treat people. To what our attitude is gonna be in the gym. It kind of hits all aspects of life. And to me it's just a baseline of who the program is, of what the expectations are.

Now, you gotta get deeper than that, obviously. That's not building any relationships. That's just saying this is what we're gonna be as a program.

But I do think that's an important thing that we've developed over the years, that just sets a tenor for what we're gonna be.

But you know, Kevin, talking about those one-on-one meetings. You know, we do different things. It varies year to year. A lot of times we'll do a vulnerability exercise, that'll be a team meeting. It's about as much as you wanna open up about good things in your life or struggles in your life. And that's usually a pretty intimate couple of hours that we kind of get to know each other.

We talk about, if you are gonna be a leader on this team, be a real leader...it's easy to hang out with the people that you wanna hang out with.

But if you're a senior, are you getting together for coffee or whatever with the freshman? Or are you inviting them to things? We fortunately have a really great group of women, and again, that's cultivated and we work hard on that.

They do a pretty good job of understanding when the freshmen arrive, that we wanna welcome them.

When I got to Creighton, it was a hierarchy. They kind of treated them poorly. And I wouldn't say they hazed them, but kind of haze them on how they treated them. And that has flipped.

Now the goal is: how welcoming can we be to the new athletes? What can we do to make them feel integrated right away? Some years it's really specific, if I feel like we don't have kids that are reaching out, maybe we sit a certain places during meals, so they'll connect. Other years I feel like they're doing it on their own, so it'll be more organic.

People will say, why is culture and why are relationships so important? And my answer to that is that  at 23 - 24. I want my hitter to go for it. Right? And if they think the people behind them are gonna be mad, if they make an error. They're not gonna go for it.

They're gonna put a safe ball into play. And then the other team's gonna put it down our throat.

I want them to know that those people that are standing behind them, covering them, have their back.

That they can take the biggest rip of their life. And sometimes it drops where we want it to. I'd say a higher percentage of the time it does.

And sometimes it doesn't. And that's okay.

When preparing the next game, how does your general approach look like and did you ever change your approach?

I've been at this a long time, 20 years.

When I started coaching we would send two VHS tapes. You'd send it overnight on Monday, so you'd get the tape on Tuesday and that's what you use.

Now we have Volleymetrics so we can watch every single film that they've played all season. So, yes, the evolution has been significant. And then you have Datavolley or Volleystation, whatever people use.

So now you have so many analytics, I think the hard part for us right now is whittling down the information that we give to the athletes.

When I started, we played 'a defense'. So whatever the opponent was doing, this was the defense we were in. Right? Then we evolved a little bit, and then we had an 'in system defense' and then an 'out of system defense'. Then I remember thinking like, gosh, we should do this against this kid and this against another kid.

Now we have a defense against every single player. Imagine trying to keep that in a kid's head when they play another team the next night.

So we've evolved. I would say we were thin with information for a while. And then we were probably too thick with information, that it was overwhelming.

It still might be overwhelming for the players. We've tried to go back, we're trying to bullet point.

If we can stay within the same defense. Maybe a star player needs this defense and the other player doesn't carry as much load. So we might keep it in the same defense just so it doesn't get too messy in the player's heads.

We definitely are constantly trying to evolve. We're constantly  trying to ask the players about how much is sticking. Because if we spend too much time or it's useless, we shouldn't do it.

And it's interesting how different players are: we might say this hitter looks like she's hitting cross but goes line. So you have to not be baited that she's gonna go cross, but stay on that line.

It's fascinating, some players, point one, they are locked in. Right away the kid looks like she's going cross and they block line. And then another kid gets baited and you have to be like, remember we discussed this like 10 times? You're gonna block line.

These players you need to grab individually and say, okay, these are the key things. You've gotta make sure you're locked into this because that one-on-one can make a big difference.

So I would say our scouting's evolved a lot over the years. But I think it will continue to change every single year in some ways.

The future of volleyball, from a technical point of view, how will the game evolve according to your opinion? Or what are you hoping for that the game will look like in a couple of years?

That's always the million dollar thought, right? How can we be ahead of the curve and create some of those things, right? I don't know.

I think you're seeing the game get more and more aggressive. In the last two years in NCAA volleyball, serving has become such a bigger weapon. We all are so focused on that. I keep wondering, with passing are people gonna go to hands more? With that tempo, you know. How do you strengthen the fingers maybe at a younger age?

I had a player that graduated, I think in 2016, that's still playing in Europe now and had great success. And she would pass with her hands a lot in the college game, but everyone had said, when you go international, it's not gonna work. And I remember her texting a couple years later. And she goes: "By the way, you can still pass with your hands." But she's got big paws.

And I've tried to do that with some other athletes and haven't had success. I don't have a great answer for you.

I think tempo is always an interesting question that ebbs and flows. It's such a trickle down from the US national team.

So whatever they're doing. Karch is really, really fast right now. They're very much just straight jump floats, no top spin. Their verbiage, angles with the platform, you know, that's kind of what everyone's doing here in the US.

But it is a discussion that we have quite often of what can we be doing that's a little unique? And I don't always have great answers to that.

It's necessary to study and know the international game, but not only to emulate it. Those insights are also needed to be able to consider what the limits of your own players are.

I think that's an important point. Coaches will watch, go to a clinic that a high level coach does who is coaching some of the best athletes in the world or in the country. And you do have to process, can my athletes do this?

I think sometimes we try to pigeonhole and emulate when maybe you don't have the athletes that can get over the net or have the quick twitch to get up fast enough.

So maybe you have to come up with some different ways to make them productive.

I've got an example. I had a 6'4'' middle who was a very slow twitch kid. But she was strong as an ox and a ball never went through her. And everyone swings blocks, right?

So the first year she's swing blocking and she physically cannot get her hands up fast enough. She's just getting tooled all day long. So we switched her to static blocking. And I know that's a bad term nowadays, but her blocks went up in the next weekend, and then going forward, a half a block a game.

She averaged about one and a half blocks a game for us. Which are great numbers. But we had to scheme, we had to release blocker most of the time, because she wasn't fast. But man, she was huge.

So again, you have to look at your athletes and say what are their strengths? And maybe come up with some different things.

According to you, what rule change is necessary? And why would you want to see this rule implemented?

Well, I really feel like we should get rid of the double contact on the second contact unless it goes over the net. And I don't know if you're old enough to remember when the first contact changed and you could to get called for that. That changed the game, right? It made points last longer, right?

Someone said it to me like this: If the average fan, the non volleyball fan has something happen, and they say, why did the ref just stop the play? It might not be a good rule.

And that's what happens all the time. I just don't see us hitting a point where it's advantageous for me to spin that second ball to my hitter. So I think it keeps points going.

I think the game from an officiating standpoint continues to evolve. And that is the one thing in my opinion that, I mean, I walk into every match and I'm like, well, we're gonna find out if they're gonna call it early or if they're gonna let 'em play. And the matches that we have officials that let 'em play. I just feel like are better. And I don't think it's an advantage.

And I feel really strongly that our game, as a whole, is not hindered, and the points last longer and it's more competitive. So that's probably the big one that I would like to see changed.

Matias: Yeah. And everybody agrees with that. So that's the funniest thing.

Everyone agrees with that? I love to hear you say that.

Matias: Every coach agrees with that. Of course there are some coaches that are like, no, we cannot lose some of the real fundamentals of the game. And one of those is, being able to set perfectly. But they'll need to evolve.

It's about having the least amount of breaks possible. And bad setting is a disadvantage as you've mentioned. If the ball goes over the net, you can maybe implement a different rule. Just to avoid that people are not going to throw the ball over the net on the second touch.

All and all, it should be an easy implementation,

Well, I'm glad to hear that. That you're on the same page too internationally. That you feel like people in Europe are feeling the same thing.

Wo do votes and it gets sent to all coaches. I mean, speaking from an NCAA perspective. And it was like a 50 - 50.

It was not overwhelming that coaches wanted the change here.

So I think that's an education piece. We've gotta get out and talk to more coaches. So that we can get more people to vote to make a change.

Matias: I really get the point of not losing an essential fundamental in volleyball. I get that point. We have to and should be able to teach people to set. But that will not disappear, because the most efficient way to set, is to set in a good way.

What are some of the player characteristics that are most important to you?

We've built our program on high character kids. So anytime I get a new recruiting coordinator, it's almost a joke of like, I want them to make sure they are coachable and good kids. That's like a baseline that has to happen.

And then we go into the talent. So first of all, they have to have those markers. If they're gonna be a nightmare human, I'm not gonna deal with it. That's the luxury of getting to recruit, right? We get to pick. So that's number one.

Our great players obviously have to have physical talent. There's no question.

And this is the challenge, right? How do you identify a kid that has an incredible work ethic? How do you identify a kid that at 24 - 24 plays better, versus at 24 - 24 plays worse or doesn't want the ball? Those are real challenges. But those are the special players.

And I think we can do some training to help in composure, but there's just players that can do it.

So I think in the recruiting process, we ideally get to see them deal with some tight situations. And it doesn't always happen that you get to see 'em. I mean, sometimes you're making quick decisions.

Ideally, I love to see players get pulled or struggle. I wanna see do they go to the bench and cry and mope. Or do they kind of regroup and stay positive. And then go back in and play better? That shows resiliency.

So those things are really gonna be important as we're kind of navigating the recruiting. I think it's easy to pick out, like you said, the kid that jumps high, has a good arm swing. But can they make that swing when it counts?

If you could have a gigantic billboard anywhere with anything on it — metaphorically speaking, getting a message out to every athlete on the globe — what would it say and why?

I think there'd be a couple themes.

I don't know how I'd put it, but that it should be fun. I had someone say, we play sports, we don't work sports. So keep that in mind, play with joy.

Go for it. Take risks.

And then I think, play for each other. I just think if you are only about yourself, go do an individual sport. If you choose volleyball, play for the people around you.

What is an unusual habit or an absurd thing that you love?

I used to go out for warmups and it would just stress me out.

I'd see someone's not locked in or we're not executing, and I'd get, I don't know if I'm angry, but it would stress me out. So I now sit in the locker room, or if I'm at home in my office. And usually do something mindless. Watch television, read a book.

And it's not like a coaching book. It might be a novel. I remember one year I was in the NCAA tournament and I was reading, I don't remember what novel it was, but it was a historical fiction about World War II. So I was literally right before a match in the locker room crying. Because it was a really big point of the book. And then I walked out and my mind was clear and I think we won the match.

But, yeah, that's something that I think is a little quirky. I try to get away from the game. Right before we dive into the match.

I've learned over the years that, a great warmup does not mean a good match. And a terrible warmup does not mean a bad match. Just let 'em warm up and try not to overanalyze it.

How has a failure, or apparent failure, set you up for later success? Do you have a “favorite failure” of yours?

Well, I really, truly believe some of my toughest times as a coach, that those instances have probably helped me be better the next time.

I talk often about the 2011 team that I kind of lost and didn't handle some player issues well. Some of the players felt like I wasn't handling things well. So I kind of lost the team. But man, I learned a ton through that. And brought people in.

We did sessions all spring and proceeded to have one of the best years in Creighton history, the following year. But I sourced back to that a lot.

But I think I can find other instances too.

Anytime I have an issue with a player or the team. And I would even say on the minuscule end. If we have a bad practice, the first thing I look at is myself. What did I not do well to prepare us for practice?

And sometimes I'll say, well, those were bad drills, or they were too slow. And then other times I might say, no, the players were the problem today. So there's both ends.

I just think when things don't go well, that ability to reflect and really learn is really the idea of growth for all of us. In any capacity. In your job, in anything. You do these interviews and each time you probably reflect and say, how could I ask that question better? Right?

So, if we wanna be great at anything, we have to be able to acknowledge that we're not perfect. And those failures can hurt. I mean, I don't wanna take away how much sometimes it hurts when players don't like me. Those have been painful experiences in my coaching career. But they're for nothing.

If you don't look at it and reflect and say, how can I be better next time these things happen. I don't do many great things as a coach,  but I think that is something that I can do and say, okay, I should have done this better. I'm gonna do it better next time.

Matias: Yeah. Also, thanks for putting me on the spot. I will not make these questions better. But I will do the introduction a bit better. I'll think about that.

For me, the biggest thing with working on VolleyBrains, which now is already going on for two years and a bit. Is: why do coaches do what they do. When you're a player, you don't really consider that your coach can have issues. That your coach maybe is not sure about the thing that they're doing.

Maybe they have even more doubts than you have doubts about certain rotations or opponents, scouting, et cetera. What was also a big trap for coaches...back then when I was playing, a lot of coaches were pretty open with scouting reports and they were like: Okay guys, give me your opinion.

And that for sure also was not the best way to do stuff. The coach needs to still carry the final decision, otherwise in the end nobody knows it anymore.

So for me it's really about that. And it's all about that buy-in. Do people believe in what you're trying to do. What the team is trying to do. What the coach is saying.

If 80% of the people believe, then it's okay. You're gonna get to 100. It's the dressing room aspect of it. If you're at 40%, you're gonna have a bad time.

Yeah. And you're exactly right. I think that's the art of leadership, right?

That you might have the strangest path ever. But if people buy into that path, you're gonna have success. Or you might have the best path ever, but if you can't get 'em on board. I think you're exactly right. That buy-in is key to everything.

You mentioned you enjoyed reading before. In regards to books and coaching resources, what are some recommendations that you can give.

I definitely do more novel reading. I love historical fiction. And I think you obviously learn things through that.

Some books that have impacted my team. We did Chop Wood, Carry Water. I loved that book. I really love, I think it's Jeff Janssen, Leadership Manual.

I am trying to look through my books right now. A long time ago we read Phil Jackson's book.

I loved a book called Educate, which was a novel. But it was about a woman that had been brought up in a radical version of the Mormon Church. This radical sect of it and it was is about how skewed her life was. And then she ended up going out into college. And how her perceptions changed of everything.

I thought it was such a good book. We live in our little bubbles and I think college athletes come from their bubble. And they're meeting all these people from all these different bubbles of life.

And how do you integrate them, how do you get them to see that maybe their bubble is great, but maybe this bubble's great too. And trying to learn from all those things. I really took a lot from that book.

I would say I do more novel reading. Honestly, books are a little bit more of a way for me to just get away.

I have several that I 'know' I need to read. But just being transparent. I like to read some of those books, but sometimes they stress me out. Because I feel like I never get a respite from coaching.

I read all this stuff and then I feel anxious as I'm doing it, because I feel like I need to be implementing this with my team. Reading is a way that I just really can get my mind away from it.

Other things that I do. I love short video learning clips. The AVCA, the American Volleyball Coaches Association sends out short clips. The Art of Coaching sends out short clips. Those videos from a drill aspect. I love that. Then I go to clinics and try to learn that way.

I've been in it a long time and so you know a lot of coaches.  So maybe you have an issue and you can call that coach, a friend, and say, okay, how are you handling this?

What is one of the best or most worthwhile investments you’ve ever made?

This isn't gonna be very flashy. But I invest in two things. And that is sleep and working out.

And I think that has helped me stay stable as a coach, stay stable as a wife, as a parent. Those things really hit high on my priority list.

So I know that's probably not the flash of an answer, but I think those are investments in myself that are small things that I think have really allowed me to stay mentally healthy.

Through a pretty stressful job, I don't have a lot of time. And those are the two things that I really lean into. I'm not gonna bend on those things.

In the last years, what new belief, behavior, or habit has most improved your life?

Something I'm kind of in the thick of right now. That I'm trying to navigate  is: How do I readjust some delegation within my staff?

And I think it's one of the hardest things. Again, I've been at Creighton for 20 years.

Passing things off that I like to do or feel like I've done decently well, is hard for me.I think I need to do some of that.

So I've been messing with that a bit this spring. I mean, in specific to my case, passing off some practice planning and practice leadership.

And letting my assistants have... I feel like my assistants have always had a voice, but maybe a bigger voice.

Maybe taking the lead more, as compared to be more secondary. So those are things that I'm kind of in the midst of right now. Trying to navigate that.

I think I need to put some more time into booster relations and some fundraising. Some things that just are gonna take more bandwidth and I don't have many hours in the day left.

So I've gotta readjust to be able to try to stay mentally healthy.

When you feel overwhelmed or unfocused, or have lost your focus temporarily, what do you do?

Well first of all, I think a lot of us coaches don't handle loss well. So let's say, we lose a match...it varies. Sometimes I'll dive into film a little bit. Some people stay up all night. I might watch a little bit.

But I think for me it's throwing it away for a little bit and sleeping. I keep going back to the sleep thing.

Because I'm always amazed how I will wake up, maybe not feeling perfect the next day. But I will bounce.

And the exception to that is when the season ends, there I don't bounce for a while. But in season, I'm smart enough to understand that we got another match to get ready for. And if I sit and wallow in self pity, the team's gonna see that.

So knowing that I have to move on and watching a little bit, but then again, just putting it away, clearing my mind a little bit. Watching a sitcom just to get my mind away from it.

Because I can fixate pretty quickly if I allow myself to.

You were talking about failure earlier, I always say, I think I'm a better coach after we lose. Even though it's not fun. But I think that failure piece, if you're competitive, it drives you. I'm sure you were that way as a player, right?

You lose a match and you're like, get me back on the court. I'm not gonna make that error again. That's the way I am as a coach.

I might feel awful, but I'm gonna work harder. You don't want so much failure that it beats you down, that you can't get back up.

But for me, failure is a little bit good. Once I go through the self pity thing for an hour or two. Then I feel a little bit of like, all right, I'm gonna prove people we got this thing. We're gonna be better.

Let's talk for couple of minutes about Neuro Fuel. Dan Friend talked to me about it. And that's the first time that I saw the app. I also downloaded it this afternoon just to have a quick look.

How long ago did the need for a visualization and meditation app for athletes/ volleyball athletes became apparent to you. What was the starting point of Neuro Fuel.

That's a great question. So we started working with Dr. Larry Widman. I talked about the team being in crisis in 2011, that's the moment where he came in and helped with some culture stuff.

It started with culture stuff and it evolved to some visualization and meditation, but all of it was just verbally from us.

So we for years have  visualized before matches. But we'll just talk the players through it. And we always give them the 'why'. How it works scientifically, what meditation does, some of these things.

When Covid hit the players, like the rest of the world, got sent home. And we tasked them with visualization and we said, visualize five minutes a day.

Long story short, some of the players called us and said, coach, I'm having trouble doing it on my own. My mind starts to wander. So I asked my assistant to record some audios and send them to the players. So we made some setter audios, some hitter audios, and sent them those. And they were well received.

That was where the discussion started. I remember telling my assistant and I called Dr. Widman and said, there's a need for this. Because we looked all over to see if we could just send them something that was already made.

That's how it started. The concept started at that point.

The other piece was, I've got three daughters that are into athletics.

And watching youth sports, you see some kids that are mentally tough. And then you see kids that have no idea how to handle anything. And unfortunately, too often the coaches don't know how to help them.

They might be a 12 year old that every time that things don't go their way, they're crying. That's not a bad kid, but someone needs to help them navigate that. I just felt like there were so many mental pieces that players were arriving to college, that that was the first time they'd ever talked about feeling anxious on the court.

They asked us what are some things that they could do? Well, let's talk about taking some deep breaths. Let's talk about how your teammates can help you. Let's talk about a word that might help you, that you could write on your wrist. All these methods. None of that from my experience was being taught at the adolescent age.

What I've learned through this is that a lot of it isn't being taught at the college age. And not even at the international age.

That was how it started. It's still a work in progress. I'm out of it for the most part. We have 3 full-time people. We have a CEO.

It's got that visualization piece and then it's got what we call our building blocks. That could be meditation, deep breathing. And then we've got audios on a lot of different things. Coping with injury. How to stay positive. How to deal with the coach that you're struggling with. How to deal with players. How to deal with social media. Sleeping, that's a big topic also. There's lots of different things.

Our biggest challenge right now is helping coaches know how to use it for their athletes. Because it's, like you said, you can give them the information, but we've got to create new habits for these athletes to use it. It takes some discipline to get into that habit.

The audios are short. A lot of them are 3 minutes long. We're trying to make it work for a teenager and a college student that maybe doesn't want to sit down and listen to something for 15 - 20 minutes.

But I believe in it. I really do think it's important. We get some pretty cool stories from some athletes for whom it has helped a lot. And that is obviously great to hear.

Matias: Checking it out this afternoon it made me think about my own playing years. I never struggled with anything. But it's not because there isn't an issue that you can't have any advantage from it. Without checking out the entire app, that was the feeling that I got. It's great for everybody.

The benefits are going to be different to different people. For someone it's gonna be a wholesale change, and they're gonna really enjoy playing volleyball, where they didn't before.

And for other people, it's gonna be about the edge that they were looking for. Thank you for clarifying it. You did a great job explaining how it came about and why it could be useful.

I appreciate you saying something about it because, obviously it's brand new so we're trying to get the word out on it.

I don't know what it's like in Belgium, but in the United States, when I grew up playing club sports, all you did was the sport. And then probably 15 - 20 years ago it went to the sport and strength and conditioning. A lot of our clubs tied that together.

I really feel like the next step is now, strength and conditioning, and the sport and, how are we developing the mind.

Jordan Larson, she's from Nebraska, so I know Jordan pretty well. And you know, she's like you. She's like, I've never really visualized.

And then she'll be like, well, I guess I have visualized. I just didn't realize I was visualizing, right?

It wasn't like I sat down and said, I'm gonna visualize. But sometimes you daydream, right? Daydreaming is visualization. So it is interesting that to some of the high performing athletes like yourselves, it just came naturally.

Matias: There's a way bigger picture there also. Five years ago when I started the job that I'm doing. I had to write a paper for one of the certificates that I needed to get to actually do the job.

The subject was performance in the workplace. What can be triggers to make yourself more efficient at the task at hand, how to make your job easier.

I don't believe in this industrial age stuff, that we all need to work 8 hours a day. A lot of our jobs can actually be done in 3 hours or 4 hours. Entering well prepared through action items, instilled habits, visualization, meditation, some physical activity et cetera. And go through those 3 - 4 hours.

During your afternoon, you can do the meetings that you think you still need. You can become better at how to do a great meeting. How do I create a better Zoom call? So it doesn't take one hour and 45 minutes for example.

Everything doesn't have to be super efficient and productive. But if we can make the output better and tax the people less, but have the same output. Why wouldn't we invest in it? It's more that story.

I think you're exactly right.

Thank you coach.



