===== SESSION: https://volleybrains.com/gianni-caprara/ =====

----- VIDEOS -----
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lKOtDW6RGOo
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tGjcFrL-sQQ
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=y6nTktW7gc4
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yPpy9XczTDk
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=25oXG-DKZF4
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LSzTpzKFmQo
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=v6B1vvSod9M
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eE9wEVhWGTQ
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=P7Dmhydh4mE
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pHANy8VPog4
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ccz0MDLOzd8
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=r3G9noaBSe8
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XVKNMaWt3Yk
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8kjd3zqHJPg
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YZE1e3_0oxE
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9s32WAqSk1c
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wLy0Cfg3-Fg
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Mh5BjtzUPE4
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SM0Y-VbPYEE
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gPW4mWmGvaw
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BFpniUhiIjo
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vs1Fzk2UNZ4
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=b87YHO4lqyU
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0BDsIZ8n9Qo
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2j6jcHoI_Mw
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4xiDZH467x8

----- TEXTO -----
62. Gianni Caprara: Never stop improving yourself.

In this Masterclass we feature Gianni Caprara. The current head coach of Besiktas in Turkey. Gianni has been at the helm of various top-tier clubs and national teams over the last 25 years.

Among his biggest feats are winning the World Championships in 2006 as the head coach of Russia's women's national team. Winning the World Club Championship, 5 time Italian champion, 3 time Italian Cup winner, 4 time Champions League winner, and more.

Gianni's trophy chest is filled with impressive victories, being very successful in both Turkey and Italy to just name 2 of the most important league's where he coached.

He is renowned for his deep understanding of the game and his ability to bring out the best in his players. The list of internationally renowned players he developed and coached over the years is very, very impressive. (Check out the videos for more insight into that)

Thank you Gianni for the great talk

There are 23 translated and subtitled video clips in this Masterclass.

Sit back and enjoy.

Enter Gianni.

Gianni, why did you decide to commit to being a professional volleyball coach? What pushed you towards that decision?

I started to train teams when I was 20 years old.

The first reason was that I wasn't a great volleyball player, but I wanted to stay anchored in my social environment, which led me to devote myself to coaching.

The second reason was my desire to help the little club where I lived, in the city where I was born. I wanted to help it grow and reach higher levels.

For about 15 or 16 years I did it like this. Yes, it often takes a lot of time for me to understand stuff. ;-) After those years, I began to venture out of my city more frequently to engage with other coaches.

This provided me an opportunity to grow, improve, and meet others.

From that point on, my career started gaining momentum.

I can imagine that in those times, it wasn't easy to contact and talk to other coaches. How did you manage to do that? Did you go out to meet them?

Good question. It really wasn't easy because we didn't have the technological advantages we have now.

What I did was, I began attending summer volleyball camps.

These camps were like massive volleyball clinics, offering an invaluable opportunity to engage and compare your skill with everyone.

At these camps, there were many high-level coaches. Yet, the environment was relaxed because we were essentially on vacation at the beach. I frequented the Eurocamp in Cesenatico.

Many top-tier coaches would gather there, sharing their experiences and opinions. Between practice sessions, we'd sit, enjoy a beer, and have in-depth discussions about volleyball.

This gave us a chance to ask plenty of questions.

Our routine involved practicing in the morning and early afternoon. After the practices, we'd seek for an explanation: Why are we executing a certain drill in a particular manner? What's the rationale behind our training methods?

These experiences were so valuable in improving everyone's volleyball knowledge.

Additionally, they were perfect for connecting with high-caliber coaches.

In fact, I met Marco Bonitta at one of these camps. Later on, he invited me to be his assistant at Bergamo.

That opportunity, in many ways, marked the start of my high level coaching career.

These camps seem like a very worthwhile environment to be in. Let's take this call for example, maybe I'll forget to ask an interesting question and now that opportunity has passed.

During these camps you're in a learning environment. Things pop up that you otherwise wouldn't ask or see.

What you're saying is so true. I consider these camps to be the most formative moments for coaches. I haven't been to them in a while.

However, I do something of my own on an individual level. Even right now here in Croatia, I am coaching two 15 year olds. They asked Irina and me to work on their technical skills. We are helping them in their development.

So during these summer camps, you'll be exposed to really important developmental opportunities. You have the opportunity to talk to a lot of coaches in a very relaxed environment.

You'll come up with a lot of new concepts. They are the greatest developmental period in time for any coach.

Whenever I have the opportunity, I'll invite my junior colleagues to attend these camps. These are very important moments.

I don't want to take anything away from official coaching courses. They have their importance.

But the real experiences on the court are clearly more educational. For our growth, they are so much more important.

I can also imagine that even for the expert coach, it can be very interesting. Asking themselves: Where do these specific questions that I'm getting originate from? How come these questions weren't answered before?

It could even make you reconsider the way we teach coaches to coach. How come these young coaches have these questions that no one until now has answered?

Yes, but there is also another thing.

The expert coach who goes to these summer camps and has to teach junior girls to spike, who are surely less talented than a champion athlete that we train during the winter months.

These coaches have to start asking themselves questions about: How do I actually teach them this?

Why am I saying this?

I have had the opportunity to coach great champions who have won World Championships. And also players who played in A2, or who struggled being in A1. Believe me, it is significantly easier to coach the great champions than players of a lower level.

Because with those great champions, the only problem you have, well there can be only two real problems: managing them and understanding the moment of the match, what do I have to do as a coach at that precise time in the game.

With players of a lower level, you not only have these 2 elements (both of them remain, of course), but you also have to teach them a lot of technical skill.

They are lacking certain essential fundamentals. They don't possess every building block, the coordinative skills, reading the exact situation, how to manage and solve situations.

So right there, the coaching task becomes a lot more complex.

What advice would you give yourself as a starting coach? An advice that is so clear and logic for you now, but that you had to develop over the years.

Undoubtedly, it's this: To move way sooner out of my city and my country. To go explore. Not to be scared to make mistakes.

Because the only certainty we have as a coach is that we'll make many mistakes.

We need to learn from these mistakes without worrying too much about their consequences. Only with an open vision, with a willingness to share, with the desire to face the world and open yourself up. That's how you can really develop.

This is the only message I would love to tell to the Gianni of 40 years ago.

The fear of leaving Italy was because it was unknown? Before, hardly any coach had left Italy, right?

No, I remember when I left, there were already people in Russia. Daniele Bagnoli was already coaching a men's team. Some other coaches had gone before me.

What has been most difficult is the fact that I went to take the place of a coach who had coached Russia for over 30 years.

So, I was going to take the spot of a guru who in his homeland was absolutely hailed and revered. And of course, that feat absolutely wasn't easy to do. Partly because their vision of what volleyball needed to be was very different than mine.

Initially, there was a bit of difficulty fitting in, just because of the fact that we had a completely different mentality.

I have to tell you that things changed a lot during my second season. Just because of the fact that I started learning Russian during the winter. So I became accustomed to their mentality word by word.

I had learned a few sentences in Russian, so the girls, the players, were positively impressed. They became more open, available to learn from me.

The mistake you usually make when you have an experience abroad, not only abroad but also in a new situation, is to dive in immediately while imposing your own concepts.

It's much healthier, in my opinion, to get there and to listen a bit more. To try to figure out what you can actually do to change something.

As you said before, to be able to understand your players, you have to listen to them. That's obvious. The language is the first barrier to get over in Russia. That's the most important thing.

Perhaps also because you took the position of somebody who did more than just be a coach. He had more control than just about what happened in the gym. They hire you as the coach, but there is nobody else left to manage the rest of the operation because he was doing everything himself.

Exactly. This aspect was very important because Karpol was practically the father and the master. He managed everything.

And until that period, the vast majority of the players of the national team were players who were part of his club, Uralochka. They were all part of the same family, both in winter and summer.

I was different than what they where used to in many ways. I'm a coach who checks very little of the life my players live outside of the gym. I leave a lot of freedom to my players because I believe it is the right thing to do. You can't be controlling what they do. That is my opinion.

I have always said that for me the important thing is how much they commit themselves during practice. It is evident that a healthy life, being a professional also outside of the gym, helps to prolong the player's career.

However, it is also true that as a coach, it is really very important to know yourself and understand what your own possibilities are.

I would not be able to 'control' their activities outside of the gym. It's just not who I am.

Like I, for example, also struggle to work 12 months a year like Giovanni Guidetti or Stefano Lavarini, to give you two examples.

I tried to do it on a few very rare occasions when I went to coach Azerbaijan, after coaching The Netherlands. But it ended up being a disaster because I need my space.

I need to recover my energy. I would not be able to work 12 months of the year.

It's an amazing job to be a professional volleyball coach. But doing it for 12 months straight, year in and year out, it feels like you're trying to live the coaching life in hard mode.

I get that, Matias.

However, I believe that there are different ways of going about your work.

I also see Giovanni (Guidetti) have loads of energy. I admire him for that exact motive. He can manage to do all that without getting into trouble.

There are many colleagues who can do it without suffering too much stress. They have the capacity to do so. I am not able though.

In this period that I'm relatively stationary, I keep going into the gym because I do individual practices. I concentrate more on the teaching of individual technique rather than the management of a group, that needs to get results.

So I continue to do my work in a more relaxed context, and it pushes me to study certain things. To teach technique to players who are not as evolved. As I told you in the previous answer.

What is advice that you hear coaches saying which should be clear by now? But where coaches still make mistakes?

So, if I make an analysis of lower level volleyball, one thing that I keep on seeing that I don't like at all is that under easy circumstances many coaches still ask of their players to keep the ball in the middle, when they play an underhand action.

Or they have them do drills, forcing the player to make an underhand movement, even when the ball is high enough to be set. I don't like to see this stuff. It even makes me very nervous, to be honest.

I'll give an example.

This classic exercise: A player on the three-meter line, her partner is standing towards her on the other side of the net, throws a long high ball to the backcourt.

The player has to go backwards, taking 3-4-5 steps to play it underhand. I can't conceive an exercise like that is being given.

If the ball is that high, just take 1 or 2 steps less and set it. That's it.

And when I ask them, "But why are you giving this exercise? Why does the player have to go back to play underhand when she can set it?" The answer, in the vast majority of the cases, is: "Because otherwise they become lazy."

So, I object and tell them: "In this way, you teach them to make an unintelligent play. Because they are doing something that is unnecessary, because setting on the first touch already exists for a while. So going backwards and taking extra steps is a useless thing.

You have to teach the player the technique in relation to the situation in which the technique is to be applied.

And this is a battle that I have when I collaborate with or talk to youth coaches. Because I don't find it useful. It's useless.

The example of the reception now: When these 'medium' quick serves go to your right or to your left.

From my point of view, you have to be taught to keep the ball on your right or on your left. Because when the ball starts to travel with a more significant velocity, it will no longer be possible to hold the ball in the middle.

So we are teaching something that doesn't really serve a purpose. So it is necessary to learn how to hold the ball near the right knee or near the left knee. Even outside of the right knee, or of the left knee.

These are the main things that still seem strange to me. I would like to see these changed.

I would say it is very important that you continue to seek out that battle.

Don't doubt that I won't. This is one of the few certainties that I have. As a coach, I doubt about more things than not.

We have to teach our players to find solutions. Not to impose a technique on them because: "It's done this way."

They have to understand why they do something and in which situation should what technique be used.

Do you have a particular goal? Maybe a goal that you already reached or a goal that is so hard to reach that it gives you daily motivation?

My personal goal is one that I have had for 10 - 15 years now.

At the start of your career, when you are young, you want to win, win, and win.

Now, my personal goal is just to try to become the best version of myself. I try to improve myself because I know very well what my strengths are. I know very well what my weaknesses are.

I would like to try to enhance the strengths and limit my shortcomings as much as possible, or at least make my own patience increase and decrease the time I make mistakes or the frequency in which I make mistakes. That always remains my goal.

This is a goal that is very actionable because you can apply it in every work context. You can apply it to high-level and low-level work. In everything and in all situations.

It is clear that I have been fortunate enough to win a lot in my career, and this mindset gave me more peace of mind, more confidence.

I think I demonstrated, when I had the chance to coach teams that had a chance to raise trophies, that I succeeded with a percentage, I would say, that was quite high.

But I like to always question myself.

For example, I gave up a contract I had with Russia. After four years, I had two more years of contract at a crazy amount of money. I was the one who left because I realized I wasn't developing my coaching. I wasn't satisfied because I was isolated. In Russia, I was completely isolated.

I couldn't talk to other coaches. I couldn't grow. So this was a big motivation to abandon a huge payday.

And I also dropped a few levels to go and coach teams that weren't exactly top-level teams. It gave me the peace of mind to go and find situations even if it weren't situations in which I could raise trophies or end up on the front page of the newspaper.

But I could grow as a coach and as a person.

I liked a lot that you mentioned the strengths and weaknesses at the start. That it's about the frequency. How often they arise, and how severe they are.

This is a standard question I ask US college coaches. Every year they'll have at least 4-5 freshmen, athletes who have never been in a more professional environment regarding team management.

Do you have fixed methods or themes you cover every start of the season to establish your team and implement your system?

I don't want to make the question too broad. This is for sure about the technical stuff, but also about how to work together. Do you have your fixed ways, or do you first observe how it all develops?

I have to tell you, starting from this year, I want to change a few things.

At the beginning of the season, I'll always do the classic team meeting, which is rather short. After that, an individual meeting where I ask questions to my players.

However, I have to tell you that for the last 3 or 4 years, I've found little use for these individual meetings immediately at the beginning. Because the players are used to it by now, they almost always respond with the same standard answers.

You can pick some things up, but it's a bit pointless also.

I think it is more useful to do these talks after 2 or 3 weeks of working together.

After all these years, I start to really know what I'm doing in the gym. So, when we enter these individual talks, whether I have seen something that I like a lot or something I like less, I would like to try to elaborate on it with them, face to face.

This is something that I definitely want to try to change.

About team management: I only remind them of the way we want to train. I make them understand what important things are that I want to see during our practice.

But the main thing remains their technique and our on-court organization. No matter what anyone says, these are the things that are of utmost importance.

Before the season, I have an idea of the team and the players I have, and an idea of how to play them. You can't always play in the same kind of way, it depends on how you've built the team.

It's important to determine what kind of game we want to play and who is responsible for what in various organizational situations: in defense, in attack, a certain type of play, etc.

These are the most important things you need to clarify as soon as possible, sharing them with the players.

Because if it's just my idea and it's not espoused by my players, well, if that would happen, it's practically impossible to apply them.

It's crucial to try to convince the athletes of the solidity of your type of game and walk on this path together. If this doesn't happen, it's necessary on my part to take a step back.

But that's not always possible because sometimes the game is what it is, and we need to understand that we have to do it in a certain way if we want to take a step forward.

As a coach, I have a certain defect, if we can call it a defect.

I can't accept a team that is a '7' to play like a '7', or it's an '8' and we're okay with it playing like an '8'. I would really struggle with that.

I know that if I had accepted my pro team to be okay with that status quo, I probably would have avoided certain unpleasant professional situations. But I struggle to accept these things because I have the need to see my '7' team be worth a '7.5', my '8' team playing like an '8.5' team.

There needs to be that little step forward that also gratifies my work.

It's not just about 'buying' great players. If I have to go to the gym just to accept the situation and keep it steady for the sake of an easy or quiet life, that would be hard for me to accept.

With the knowledge that sometimes the limit of your team is the limit, of course.

The future of volleyball, from a technical point of view, how will the game evolve according to your opinion?

I'll just talk about women's volleyball. Because that's what I know.

Volleyball will evolve depending on the players that you have in your gym. Balance stands at the base of everything.

Depending on the physical and technical characteristics of the players you have in your gym, a coach must try to create the best gameplay for the team they brought together.

If you have a team like Fenerbahce, you have to use the break phase the most possible. Because you will serve very hard, work well in block, like they do, and in defense. In the side-out phase, you must try to avoid aces. That's all.

You don't have to demand your receivers to bring the ball to the net. You have to use the reception just to put a ball, even, on top of the three-meter line and play your high ball outside with Arina, Vargas, and Ana Cristina. They won't have any problem with that. This is one type of team.

If you have a team that is very technical and not very physical, it is obvious that you have to try to limit errors as much as possible. You have to base your game on the quality of your second-line, covering, reception, defense, and on shot management.

Try to figure out what kind of attack shots you need to make. It's a way more complicated road to travel. But the future of volleyball solely depends on the type of players you have.

It is clear that we'll search players who are increasingly more physical. With huge power, with great jumping ability, hard hitters. Because it is the easiest route.

It's normal for it to be so. But at the same time, we shouldn't lose teaching technique and teaching a qualitative first and second touch.

One thing I see, looking at the big teams from right now is, I see too often that the quality of the second touch goes down because we want to speed up the game, even in 'out of system' situations, forcing attackers to shot or tip the ball. Not because they want to. But because they have an issue with the tempo not being right.

It is necessary to find a better balance to try to understand when to use a faster ball and when to use a higher ball.

Women's coaches say often to be 3 - 4 years behind and look at men's volleyball as an example. Perhaps they need to realize that already now in 'out of system play', men play a softer ball.

When you are 'out of the system' and you play a fastball but you're not credible without middles or without fast second line spikes, well you just make it easier for your opponents to block you.

From my point of view, it is necessary to find a better balance and try to soften the ball a little bit when your middles aren't credible anymore or when your second line is absent.

If you have a team where your opposite is a hard hitter, your S1 is a hard hitter and your 3rd outside spiker is a player that balances the team out that we never use on the pipe (bic). In that situation, it's useless to push the ball towards your S1 or your opposite. Because you're playing them out against a block that is ready, but you just created less options for them to hit.

The softer set solves that issue.

And you'll even have more time to put yourself in the right cover positions instead of running to a spot without knowing where the team is covering.

Excuse me, Matias.

I interrupt you because you're putting emphasis on a very important situation which is covering. I would even say a big 'mea culpa' here.

In my teams, I also need to be better on this. Because too many times you see that in 'in system' situations the players who do not attack and don't take an approach that they mentally leave behind their covering task. We are only attentive on it, well not always, but mostly only on high ball situations.

It's critical and I'm looking for exercises for 'in system' situations or fast set situations to activate my 3rd player on the net. To take care of the cover and help the team. Why? Helping your team is not something to talk about. But to act upon. You are ready when your teammate attacks, you are ready to cover and help them by saving an extra ball.

Just put up your game tape and then watch together to see what everybody really is doing. Do that every week, you'll spend a lot of time, and hope there will be a positive evolution.

Yes. Unfortunately. It is not something easy to solve.

I tried to study this last season. But wasn't satisfied with what I came up with. But I am not giving up. I'm going to try to find something that can give some gratification. That can be helpful for our team.

According to you, what rule change is necessary? And why would you want to see this rule implemented?

I'm not the kind of coach who goes to unionize about rules. The rules are the rules. They are the same for everybody.

One thing I dislike is how rotational errors are handled. They are often and frequently called when it is not to be considered a big opportunity for the team that gets the fault.

And they are not called when there is a rotation error that truly steals time and resoundingly helps the team that finds itself in side-out.

I'll give you the classic examples:

P2: The opposite is back row. Not in a comfortable position, but also not hurting anybody. It's a bit careless to leave early, but there isn't a real advantage there. Nothing special can happen.

P1:Like many teams are doing now, keeping the opposite in position 4, they start to run plenty of time before the server touches the ball — that is something I really dislike.

Even in P4, the middle that wants to run a 'fast' (slide) is leaving 3-4 seconds before the ball is touched. And takes a huge advantage there for her approach.

These are things that I think the referees should control and regulate better. Because it is not nice to see someone steal an advantage like that.

Beyond the rules, I have to tell you, what I would like to see is an improvement of the arbitration level. I keep seeing some very strange things. I see errors that are hardly acceptable. And they then infuriate the coaches, flowing into scenes we don't want to see in our sport.

I think something also happened recently in the VNL between Brazil and Poland? I also posted a video on Facebook of a glaring mistake that happened with Vakifbank where Egonu basically had attacked in second line, then staying within the three meters and blocked the ball that came over the net.

Which was a sensational error, but the Turkish referee did not whistle. And even after many protests. I mean, when everybody protests so vehemently, so vigorously, a few questions you should ask yourself.

And with the technology that is there now, just check it out to avoid these mishaps.

I would like to see more regularity in reffing.

Best game you've ever seen. What recent or game from the volleyball vaults did validate once more that volleyball is the greatest sport on the globe (for all of us). For sure share your opinions about this matchup, what you took away from it.

The best match for me will always remains the World Championship final. Not because we won it, but because of the path we had followed to arrive and beat Brazil. We had identified Brazil as our real antagonist.

So for 6 months, from May to November 2006 when the World Championships were held, we worked exclusively on how to beat Brazil. There were well-defined technical situations that led us to make progressive leaps.

First of all, we participated in the Grand Prix, which is now known as the VNL and in my starting six, I had a setter and a spiker which I changed after 5 or 6 matches.

I realized that we had to take more risk.

The setter was excellent at finding our middles but didn't run much, and our reception wasn't the best. It was crucial for our middles to block and serve well, because with players like Gamova, Godina, and Sokolova, the attacking prowess of our middles wasn't as crucial.

Our receiver, Safronova, who was the captain, was there mainly to organize our reception. But our reception was far from spectacular. That's why I introduced Godina, who might not have been a great receiver, but she improved our offense and serve.

This change was the first step.

Subsequently, we lost to Brazil in the Grand Prix with 3-1, having played only one set of good volleyball.

Then we lost to them in the World Cup, which mattered only for the positioning in the tournament. But with each match, we improved slightly.

One of the essential technical strategies was a well-organized block defense, differentiated for players like Jacqueline and Sasa. Another change was our spiking tactic against Fofao, they could too easily defend our key player, Gamova.

So I had a conversation with Katerina (Gamova), asking her to speed up her spiking arm while spiking in parallel, risk it more. Otherwise, they'd just defend against her or another option was to camouflage her tips better. She began hitting parallel shots that became difficult to defend.

Winning felt like a real apotheosis, as we had honed our skills precisely where we needed to defeat Brazil.

Playing a World Championship final obviously brings psychological challenges. Some players misjudged situations due to heightened emotions. Yet, our technical progress was undeniable.

Another remarkable phase was during my second year at Piacenza. Although the team wasn't technically superior, we played a fantastic game of volleyball, especially in transition. It was a sight to behold.

The team lost very few sets, even in significant games like the Italian Cup or the Supercup Final. We lost very few points overall.

If you can make the strongest 'starting six' in the world, right now. What would your team look like? Why did you choose these players?

I'll just talk about players that I've coached.

Without naming a starting six, I'll name these athletes.

Jordan Larson was undoubtedly the player with the most mental toughness that I've ever trained. A player with an incredible ability to focus on the work that needs to get done. Great at aiming for certain results. With a great ability also to teach her teammates.

A hard worker, with a winner's mentality of the highest level and also a great companion to her own players.

Lyuba Sokolova is probably the most technical player I've coached. A real phenom. The greatest phenomenon I have ever coached. However, if she had the mentality of Jordan Larson, she would have won anything she desired. She just could do anything: setting, defense, receiving, blocking. A technical phenomenon.

Then there is Maja Poljak. A player who impressed me a lot because I saw her in the early days of her career, up til the end of her career. I coached her when she was 20 years old, and again when she was 35. She underwent an incredible mental and technical development. With a big focus on her day-to-day work. She walked an incredible path.

Then I want to spend a few words on a player that I have never trained. Who nevertheless impressed me because...

Well I get very excited with seeing those natural born phenomena play, I admire and respect them of course. However, way more I like a player's path who has really earned their development through a tremendous work ethic.

I always take as an example the 3 tennis bosses Federer, Djokovic and Nadal. They really taught themselves how to do it, how to be a sportsman. Even at 35 years old they keep on adding bits and pieces to continuously improve.

To come back to what we were talking about earlier, the player who has most impressed me over the course of her career has been Gözde Kirdar. The Turkish player who was coached by Guidetti, who has always played at Vakifbank.

She retired a short while back. And if I remember correctly she's married to an Italian now. I saw her at the start of her career in 2006 with Turkey. And believe me Matias, I would have never bet that she could get to play at the highest level. To me she honestly looked like a rather poor player. That's the truth.

But she did an incredible job. Over the course of her career, she made an incredible physical improvement, she put on muscle, she put in real hard work. That's also what Giovanni (Guidetti) told me. She underwent a big technical improvement in every single fundamental, her receiving, her hits in attack, that mentality that she slowly had acquired, so much so that at Vakifbank she had become a real leader.

An extremely important player for the balance of that team. These are the players that really impress me.

Then I am obliged to make a particular mention for the lady with whom I'm spending my life with. Which is Irina Kirilova. I want to tell you a story about the mentality of 'the player'. The player that gives their all in the gym. No, I'll tell you 2 stories even.

Spezzano against Perugia. I am the coach of Spezzano and she is the setter from Perugia. We play against each other and back then we already were together.

Quarterfinals of the playoffs. First match 3 - 0 for Perugia, second match 3 - 0 for Perugia, third match 2 - 0 for Perugia. 16 - 8 for Perugia. So this thing is already over, she had already won it.

We attack. They defend pretty badly with the ball going into the stands. Irina runs to retrieve the ball, goes under the referee's table, saves the ball while banging her head. They score the point. And I told her...well you know which Italian curse word I wanted to say. Why do you even do that? But it was natural for her to do so.

The second story. We were training 3 sisters from Belarussia, this is 2 years ago, they were 13 years old. We had finished our individual technical practice. And we had 10 minutes to go. I told Irina: Let's play a 2 on 2 for a couple of minutes. Like that we end on a fun note.

They start to play and the ball is about to drop. She at the age of 50 and over dove on the floor to save the ball. I told her, but what are you doing? "Gianni, for me it is natural," she told me. That is the mindset of winning players.

To finish this speech, you can see that I like this a lot.

The positive leading players of a team are those that make the difference. If these leaders consistently commit to give the right example, there is no doubt that the team will reach their maximal result possible.

I don't know if they can win, that also depends on the quality of the opponents.

However, usually the yardstick is... the strongest players of the team, the leaders who give the example every single day, they make the team a winning team.

If you could have a gigantic billboard anywhere with anything on it — metaphorically speaking, getting a message out to every athlete on the globe — what would it say and why?

That's a complicated thing for me. I'm not the biggest fan of publicity in general.

The words and phrases I like for us sports people are the classic ones:
learning, improving, progress through making a few steps at a time, focus your attention on just one thing and try to improve it.

Always have the will, the willingness to improve.

So, probably, 'improvement' is the word I like best. Because I stay and remain really attached to those things, as I said before. I mean, I get very excited to see the improvements of players or teams who perhaps before had struggled the most.

For example, another thing that I like to share with you: In 25 years of my career at the highest level, I have won and I have seen many teams win.

But if I have to tell you the victory that impressed me most in these 25 years, it has been Busto Arsizio's victory of the Italian championship.

Because Busto Arsizio's victory, the one they won with Carlo Parisi is very particular— they had Carli Lloyd in her first year in Italy, they played with Havelkova, Meijners, Bauer in the middle, Havlickova, and Leonardi at the libero...

Why did that stick to me? Because it again was that journey. Ten years of effort, the same city, the same coach, improving year by year. Reaching this incredible feat.

Let us not forget, this was a truly resounding feat because those players had never won anything before that time.

So that was, in my opinion, the most incredible feat of these last 25 years of high-level women's volleyball.

Because in all the other leagues, okay, there are teams that are created to win or get close to winning their championship, but it's not that they did any sensational stuff. This, on the other hand, in my opinion, was something huge.

The conclusion of this journey, probably also facilitated by that specific moment in time. Without a shadow of a doubt, an unexpected victory.

What is something that you will always stick to in your weekly schedule?

My habit is to have a meeting every day before the afternoon technical practice. I devote half an hour to video and meeting, both to explain certain things that we have to do in the next game, and to explain the coming practice.

When we get to the game I don't talk anymore. I never enter into the locker room. By that point we spent so much time during the week to prepare the game.

On game day, I find it useless to go and remember the stuff that we talked about the entire week. That moment is for them. It is more important that the leaders of the team talk at that time because they have already heard everything what needs to be done during the week. That moment needs to be used by the team's leaders.

And I have to tell you the truth: I don't like the warm-up that much. I get anxious before the game and 40 minutes of warming up is something I can't stand. You gave me a good idea. Maybe I stop going to watch the warm-up, maybe I go outside for a walk, and then arrive when the game starts. It might be that I start doing that.

These 'innovations' maybe aren't that well liked by the club management. Maybe I have to continue in the classic manner.

Regarding watching tape before nearly each practice, this means that you are already prepared a week before the game, which means that your scouts need to be ready 3 to 4 days in advance?

Normally, already on Monday, I'll have my concept ready for the coming game. I'll talk about the game that we have just played with the players, I'll show the things we did well, and the things we didn't do well.

But I'll start right away to set up the next game. Maybe in the next game, it is necessary to do certain things that we did not do in this game.

I like to start the first day of the week to talk about these things. Especially if there is a need for a certain way of spiking, so it is interesting to talk about it as early as the beginning of the week because then you have the entire week to prepare for that kind of hit or that attack combination that maybe can be useful for the next game.

Block-defense is implemented on the 2nd and 3rd day.

How has a failure, or apparent failure, set you up for later success? Do you have a “favorite failure” of yours?

You will always learn more from your failures, if we can call them that. Let's call them disappointments. When they fire you, defeats, etc., they are certainly more educational than 'the victory'.

This happened to me when I was coaching Villa Cortese. It was a very, very young team. Caterina Bosetti was 17, Veljkovic was 20. Folie was 20, Parrocchiale. Very young players.

Every practice was 3 hours long, we needed to put in the work. We were doing well. And they fired me in January, which I didn't understand because...we were doing well.

Right away, Piacenza called me because they had just fired Mazzanti. In my opinion, Piacenza was the strongest team in the championship, and in fact, we won both the Italian Cup and the championship.

When I arrived in Piacenza, I immediately modified the way of practicing that we had at Villa Cortese. Making practices of an hour and 45 minutes at max. All my players were 30 years old and older, who knew exactly what needed to be done, so there was no need to put too much pressure on the practice. I would explain them a couple of things, they delivered on it, and the practice was over.

I needed to be malleable enough to change the training method I had been using up to that point with this team that was completely different.

You did well to answer like that. Because in the end, you know... You made it look like a failure, but you spun it around at the end.

No okay, something else occurred to me. The failure that I consider to be the most serious one, where I really messed up.

It was the year of Rebecchi Piacenza, the first year I coached Piacenza when I arrived back from Russia in 2010.

I got the approach completely wrong then. I gave certain targets and goals to that team and completely failed at predicting what would happen. Also getting how to approach the championship completely wrong.

In the second part of the season, we had improved a lot, while during the first part, we gave away several matches. We got nervous because the results were below expectations. I was the first one to get nervous. We even got relegated.

I remember a player telling me, 'Gianni, too bad because if we had 4 - 5 more wins, we would have made it.' That's true. Unfortunately, I was wrong from the beginning. So by then, 'the omelette had been made'.

That was a big lesson because I learned that it's dead wrong to put important outcome goals before you have even started the season.

The only goals you can put are working hard and trying to improve.

Do you have a book that you like a lot? Which lessons did you get out of it?

The book that impressed me the most recently is the one about how the All Blacks are managed.

This book clearly explains how to build a club around your team. The club must have it's own values. It must have its own way of operating. Its own values that must be espoused by the coach and the management.

And the coach must transmit them to a team leader. And the leader of the team has to convey them to the other leaders.

The concept is to broaden as much as possible the circle of leaders who espouse these values and demonstrate on a daily basis how to live inside of that club.

This is a book that really impressed me.

I think a lot more can be done regarding all of this, both by us as coaches and by the clubs.

But you need to have clarity about where you want to go first.

If we compare Italian soccer teams, Juventus has always espoused the phrase: 'Winning is the only thing that matters.' Milan stands for: 'Be beautiful, play a beautiful game to entertain the crowd.'

Both of them are fine.

But the important thing is that you have decided your path and that you follow that line and bring into the club the people who share that approach. And if you don't agree with that approach, there is no point in coming here.

What is one of the best or most worthwhile investments you’ve ever made?

It's very simple.

Every time I gave up something in the immediate future, I gained something else in the long run.

I'm referring to all the times I've found myself in my life making choices at crossroads, and I always chose to give up money because I thought it might be useful to make that choice for my future.

For example, when I went to work for the first time in the Serie A as the assistant to Marco Bonitta, going to work in Bergamo as an assistant coach, I accepted a contract where I earned less money than I was making up to that point with a lower level team.

I did it because I thought it could enrich my knowledge and become a better coach.

When I told you earlier that I cancelled the contract with Russia, which was highly paid, but I realized that I was not growing, so I gave up that money. After that, I started to create myself a different career, and I definitely grew as a coach.

So these are the times when I gave up something in order to hopefully improve myself, because you obviously don't have any assurance that it will work out. Each time, though, it worked out. I made the right choices.

I have no regrets.

In the last five years, what new belief, behaviour, or habit has most improved your life?

I am a person with a strong character, an anxious person who struggles tolerating injustice. I have a hard time tolerating people who are not fully committed, and therefore, I get nervous pretty quickly.

Since the pandemic, I started doing a little bit of yoga, and it helped me a lot. Well, a lot, I don't know about that. Let's say that if I used to get pissed off after 2 seconds, that now it takes 4. I gained capacity to endure stuff.

I have improved, but I'm no holy man yet.

I'm happy about that change, trying to become my best version. It's something I will keep doing. I like it because I feel I'm getting better.

That's a thing I didn't do 5 years ago, but I'm doing it now.

When you feel overwhelmed or unfocused, or have lost your focus temporarily, what do you do?

This is a nice question because during the game, you lose clarity, and the step I'd like to take is to remain clear in my head.

I realized by studying myself that in order to have a clearer mind during the matches, I have to give less 'importance' to my work.

What does that mean?

It means that I must continue to work as I have been doing but not consider this as the end-all and be-all.

I'm trying to develop in that direction to make sure that a defeat is, let's say, a normal outcome. It should not affect you or debilitate you.

During the game, if I realize that I'm running hot, I concentrate on my breathing and try to regain clarity.

This is the keystone, as the great Angelo Lorenzetti says: the fact of understanding or sensing the moment you are in really makes such a difference.

The big unlock to win the game or to help your players and the team, is understanding the moment you're in. Understanding what is needed at that moment.

But this is not that simple of course.

Thank you, Gianni.



