===== SESSION: https://volleybrains.com/john-dunning/ =====

----- VIDEOS -----
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lIf0NtJYcXA
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wsEkEVuG-Fw
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=K0pRBI78jBI
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sX66_Xfhm_o
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pvmP9pG37ok
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bi8imYhv1u0
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DpLbK6g9HdM
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GLkMIrKFjX4
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=I8WPa8IP4M8

----- TEXTO -----
64. John Dunning: Only do things that show respect.

In this Masterclass we feature John Dunning. John is one of only two Division I college volleyball coaches to have won NCAA championships at two different schools. And has guided his teams to 5 NCAA championships.

Coach Dunning came to the sport of volleyball as a high school coach. Later on he spent 32 years in collegiate coaching. First at the University of the Pacific and from 2001 til 2016 at Stanford University.

Coach Dunning continues to support our game through the Art of Coaching Volleyball together with Terry Liskevych and Russ Rose.

In this Masterclass John talks about:

The one coaching skill that overshadows all others (listening)

Why teaching any skill must be based on science/ biomechanics

What his goal is and how it could help anybody's journey

What the most fundamental team rules should be and why

The 2 things any successful team needs to possess

and so much more, ...

Our call went over 2 hours long and resulted into a 14.000 word article, so we chopped things up and will feature part 2 next Sunday.

In part 2 we dive even more into the technical side and the future of our sport.

Before we get this started a big thanks to coach Dunning for his availability.

Enter John.

John, Why did you decide to commit to being a professional volleyball coach? What pushed you towards that decision?

I grew up playing basketball and golf in high school here in the States. I tried to go to college to play, went to junior college and played both. But probably wasn't good enough to play beyond that. I had never seen volleyball ever. Either seen it or played it or been in the gym with it. Never.

But I never thought about being a coach either. I became a high school math teacher. I love mathematics, just fits my brain for some reason. I don't know why. And I became a high school basketball coach. I loved it. But I got tired of it, because it was all year round.

And a miracle happened in the United States.

They started something called Title IX. It was a dictate from our government that said we have to treat female athletes respectfully. And here's some rules to follow. So they started women's sports at my high school and some of the kids already were playing volleyball. They came to me and said:  "Would you coach the team?"

What I didn't know is they'd already asked three other people on our staff. And they all said no. So I was their fourth choice.

So I said, yes, and I loved it from the first day. I love coaching women. I love the sport of volleyball. I'm a very logical, very disciplined person. So I got into it really quick, even though it was impossible to find information to help me.

I found one book, Al Scates from UCLA, his book. They hadn't invented video yet, so I didn't have that. I had to teach myself. And I had a friend who played in the service and he helped teach me.

I was 10 years in as a high school teacher and I had two children by then, when I got to know Terry Liskevych, who coached at the University of the Pacific here in California.

He liked me for some reason. And he asked me to start coaching at clinics with him. He did clinics around the country. When he left to become the USA coach in 1984, end of 84- 85, he helped me get the job at University of Pacific. Even on the day that I got the job, I didn't know if I wanted the job.

But my wife said, who is an amazing person, her name's Julie.

And she's a very strong person. So that's the reason I became a professional volleyball coach, a college coach. I kind of had to. And I did not know what I was getting into.

I mean, I know Terry, so I followed the game as best you could back then. I had players who were recruited to play in college, but I didn't really know what I was getting into.

Then I did it for 32 years. And I enjoyed most of it. Recruiting is challenging for anyone. The ups and downs of coaching and the constant pressure. The small town focus on our sport, where I'd walk into a store and people would want to talk volleyball with me. I wasn't geared for that to start with.

I don't like attention. But I got it. There's tough stuff about it.

But most of all, I love coaching generally. I love the thought of it, how to work at it and improve. So that's my path in a quick little bit.

What advice would you give yourself as a starting coach? An advice that is so clear and logic for you now, but that you had to develop over the years.

I think we all get caught up in competition. In wanting to be really good. Really living the idea of coaching for life, rather than victory. Is really, really a key.

It's so easy to get caught up in coaching for the victory. I know I was like that for a long time. At times anyway.

I like people. I liked being a teacher. I was probably a better math teacher than a coach. And all the time I wasn't committed to this. And I would say those were my worst moments.

My best moments were when I was fully committed to the idea of coach for life, not for victory.

Yeah, I do have another piece of advice. I'm a mathematician. So I'm a problem solver. That's what you do in math. You solve problems. And for a long time, I thought that was my mission in life.

And when you're dealing with people, especially young people. At first 14 to 17 years old. And for 32 years, 17 to 22. They have things that happen in their life.

They don't play in games. They get hurt. They're not happy with me because I'm trying to push them. Whatever it might be. But I was always trying to solve the problem.

So an athlete might walk into my office and look like they needed something. As soon as they sat down and said anything, my brain was calculating how I could help them and solve their problem. It took me a long time to become a listener. My wife is actually a really good listener. My view of coaches generally, maybe people generally, is there aren't very many good listeners.

There are lots of people who can solve their own problem. If they can just tell someone what the problem is. So just to sit and listen.

Maybe ask a question to encourage them to say more. I think is a really, really good skill. To be a great coach. I think it's a necessary skill. If you are not a listener, I think you put serious limits on yourself.

And so for me, I care. I think I wanted to listen all along. But there was this 'problem solving' itch in me. That as soon as I started to figure out what I wanted to say to them. I stopped listening to them. And that was a mistake.

And the longer I coached, the better I got at it. And the more it helped.

So listen, don't assume you know what's going on. Listen and let people tell you things. And encourage them to keep talking, you're going to find out so many ways to help their life be better.

Matias: The funny thing was. You were listening so intentful at the start of our call here today. That I was like. Do I have to continue talking about why I'm doing this?

I was unsure if you were just really listening very good. Or you were just like:" Okay man, you can stop talking now. I know why I'm here." So that's the negative side of listening.

Yeah, it is and it can make people uncomfortable. I just grew to the point where I could outwait them. I would just sit and look at them until they continued.

I still do it now, because I still coach a little bit. My granddaughter plays club volleyball here. She's 16 years old and she plays high school. So I help coach her club team.

First time I've ever been an assistant. It's a totally different job, than the head coach. I'm appreciating that right now. I don't want to be a head coach anymore.

What are bad recommendations you hear about coaching or training volleyball?

I think the thing that I would bring up, that I don't think is good about our world is: we are going to look to other people to help us learn.

Since when I began coaching there were lots of people where I said yes to, I will do that. Who didn't have the right reasons for why they were teaching, and what they were teaching.

I think there's a lot of ego involved in saying, this is my way, I'm going to tell you, I think you should copy me. I don't have good reason for it, it's just what I think.

I remember going to a national clinic here in the States one time.  This very highly recognized coach was talking about blocking, saying this is the footwork we're going to do.

Say you're going to your right to block. What you're going to do is land on your right leg. And as you're landing from blocking, do an air step and begin to turn as you land so that you can transition quicker.

I did it. Then I looked around the world and listened to the athletes that were becoming injured. I then went to a clinic several years later and the same coach was saying, "don't do this". You're going to have more injuries.

Well, I'm glad that that person corrected themselves.

But they were thinking without thinking, when they were teaching what they were teaching.

So as I went along, I've always cared a lot about health and my athletes didn't have a lot of injuries. But a couple of them did.

One, a back injury. At 18, she blew out a disc in her lower back, L5 S1. Another girl tore her ACL. And I began to think more about why we ought to teach what we teach. In terms of our skills and how we move and do things on the court.

One of the first thoughts I had was, I've listened to coaches talk technically about everything. And in that point in my career, I hadn't heard one coach talk about how to land. Well, the way we land is the reason for all the ACL tears that happened or almost all of them happened. It's because of how we land.

So the girl that hurt her back, she had surgery. A discectomy, which at that age could be the end of your movement. Certainly the end of an athlete. Her doctor was great. The surgery was good. When she had done her physical rehab and was going to be transitioning into playing volleyball again, she had two physical therapists that she worked with.

And they said, let's go to the gym. You, her name is Addie, you are going to show us what you do in the sport. And we're going to talk to you about what she can still do now.

So we went through each of the skills. And when we'd show them the skill, they'd go, she can't do that anymore. And we were like, what? We're talking passing and she was a great passer, even though she was a middle, she passed. She was a middle, she's a total rarity. They said she can't do that anymore.

So we talked to them about why. And they said, because for her to live her life she has to exist always in what we call 'neutral spine posture'. And she rounded her back and stood with her back rounded when she passed. And they said she can't do that.

So if we want people to play longer, to enjoy themselves and not hurt themselves in our sport, we better pay attention to that. We showed them every single skill, so we're talking serving, she's serving a floater. She tossed some balls, they got a little behind her, had to do this to hit it, to serve it. And they said, no, there's no way she can do that again.

If she arches her back like that over and over and over again. She's just going to end up hurting herself again. To me, that said, okay, I got to rethink all that we do.

The reason of how we're going to do it is because of what medicine says and what biomechanics says. So I ran into a biomechanist from Australia, at the Australian Center of Sport. I'm not sure if that's the official name.

In Australia there's a lot of great research in the athletic area. At least that's what I feel. She came to Stanford and we were talking. About attacking she said, okay, what are the similarities in the other sports to volleyball. Let's say volleyball attacking. Everybody would talk about throwing and baseball. Maybe throwing a football.

She said, no, biomechanically, the only thing that's similar to attacking is tennis serving. And hitting a tennis ball overhead. So we talked about why. She said, because if you're going to be a great volleyball attacker, you have to hit up at the ball.

You have to be able to hit with spin or you can't hit with velocity. To be able to hit with spin. You have to hit up at the ball. Yeah, there are adaptations of that with great athletes and how they change it. But generally, when you're teaching the sport. That has to be.

So I began to think more about exactly what we say and how we copy things and learn from other situations. And apply it to our sport.

The only thing that throwing a baseball compares to is hitting a float serve. That's very similar because it's very horizontal. And the better you get it hitting exactly at the level that you want it, the lower you can serve it. So we could biomechanically compare those two. And analyze it and teach people what we needed to teach them.

So how far in front of them the contact point has to be rather than back here. Over the shoulder versus over the head, which is very common. There's all these things.

So for me, the bad thing that happens is the reasons for why mentors, teachers, people tell us what to do, is not based in science. And it should be. Always.

So the landing part. When you think about a female left side hitter, who's right handed, the ball is coming to them from the right side of their body on almost every set. We want them to reach to attack. Because you want as much altitude as you can get.

And as soon as you start to reach, your shoulders tilt. And if your shoulders tilt, your hips are going to tilt. And if your hips tilt, that's going to encourage you to land on one leg. On your left leg, every single time. We're teaching them to land improperly, because that's how we're teaching them to attack.

Right? That's a problem. Well, do you want them to hit lower? No, I want them to reach. But I have to teach them to land.

As soon as I teach them to jump, I have to teach them to land.

So few people think they have time to do that or think that they should. We look at men as a counterpart. Men don't tear their ACL very often.

They may hurt their back as much. I just never read about that. They are different, there are reasons. Females versus males. So maybe males learn to play the sport and land differently. I don't care. I dealt with the same gender my whole life. And as soon as we say, do this and reach, then we have to begin to teach them how to land.

Otherwise we're doing them a disservice and we're actually causing their injuries. So now as the game has become more and more athletic with the speed of sets, blockers running and jumping off one leg and going to block, to fill as well as they can. Because the sets are so low. We have to teach them how to land on two feet, but the game says we also have to teach them how to land on one.

So when we're in training, in weight room sessions with physical trainers, they better know that they have to spend time on one leg. Strengthening and balancing in order for them not to be hurt.  Because the game is saying, we have to do this.

We have to say, okay, now what does science say we should do to help keep them healthy? So that was a very long answer.

Matias: It's a long answer, but you did very well at explaining it like that.

It's easy to say, everything has to be based on science and then not talk anymore. Then what do you mean, you know? So it's really important that you thoughtfully explained like you just did.

Well, when you're as old as I am and you coached for 50 years, the thing that can support different ways to think about it, is stories. Stories that you have about this moment or that moment, or this athlete or that athlete.

And those two athletes, what happened to them changed my whole coaching life. I stopped listening to other coaches about how they did things.

Except strategically, I'd listen. Physically. I didn't listen anymore after a certain point.

We just paid attention to biomechanics. Which usually, at that the center of that is medicine. It's science.

Do you have a particular goal? Maybe a goal that you already reached or a goal that is so hard to reach that it gives you daily motivation

At my age. Everything that I've been through in my life, I have basically got one goal. And it probably would be good for every human being, but it's very difficult for people.

And my goal is to wake up every day and live this day. Love your family each day, goes with that. I'm happy to wake up. I'm thrilled.

Most people don't think that way, they take it for granted. They waste days. Because they woke up a certain way and the day went negative. You might as well not have lived that day, except to learn lessons.

But I want to wake up each day and live today.

I'm becoming better at it. And everybody would get more out of life if they could live that goal.

Matias: Exactly. It's like you were looking into my life the last few days. It's really funny that you were saying the stuff that I was thinking. I threw away the day, yesterday. And last night I was like, tomorrow I cannot let this happen again.

I was too eager to get stuff done. I missed some parts with my family, because I wanted to get the work done. But the work is still there tomorrow. And there's going to be something else to work on. And really last night I was like, you just threw away the day.

Along the way, I also developed a skill. I don't intentionally start thinking negatively or whatever mindset you could be in that isn't a positive one.

Usually something triggers it with me. I might be driving and I'm happy and something pops into my head that was uncomfortable or whatever. Then I go down a trail of negative thoughts.

Because one thought leads to the next. I saw this person, and I did this. And you end up in a totally different mindset after five minutes. And all you were doing was driving. You're supposed to be thinking about driving. But my mind has gone somewhere. Then it can ruin the rest of your day.

So I got to the point where, if I found myself struggling or feeling really negative, I then said:"Okay, think back, how did we get here." Try to trace my brain's thoughts back and go: "Oh my gosh, that's a stupid thought. And it created all that." Okay, start over.

But I needed to find out 'why' for me. Who I am. Why I got to there. So I can go, I'm okay. I didn't have to get to here. That thought was worthless. It's just a part of my past that bothers me and it triggered all this. So let's start over.

It's the idea of restarting when you get to a point where it's not good.

Sometimes life isn't good and you can't. There are hard things that happen.

But a lot of the time, that's not what caused it. It's something that got into your head. Led you to here and you don't want to be there. So fix it.

So for me, that's been something. It's like a skill. And it really helped me to stay present in, I want to live today.

Matias: Beautiful.

This brings me to dive a bit deeper into this. It's really interesting to me. I also told you at the start of this, that these a bit more deeper questions. Or questions that can provoke a deeper or more insightful answer have also been helpful for me. How should I look back at my professional career. About being a father, about being a husband, et cetera.

So except for experiences, this insight came to you due to reading? Or due to other people giving you advice? Or just a sense of...this is my life. I'll do this just one time. So better do it good. I don't know. I'm just guessing you right now.

For me, there aren't very many things in my life that I would credit to what I read.

I've had mentors, which means I'm a lucky person that someone has helped guide me. But for me, the people that really taught me stuff are my family. My wife and my two kids and their families. Once you become a parent and a grandparent, you get different life lessons.

But for me, the primary person is my wife.

This February is our 50th anniversary of being married. We've been together over 50 years now. She's a different person than I am. She just straightens me out all the time. When I get huffy or happy with myself or too big for my pants. She just straightens me out.

And she makes me understand that I should just shut up right now.

Or if I get off track. Or if I start to not be strong enough, because of what's happening in life. She just straightens me out and says, stand up, let's go, come on.

I'm really lucky that I've had good mentors and I have a perfect partner in life.

Matias: That's really beautiful. Maybe also a great expression.

Life is just about having someone that tells you to shut up once in a while. And that's just it. We can end there. We can close down VolleyBrains. That's the only thing that we need to know. :-)

Team rules. Are there some fixed rules that you put in place? Technical/volleyball related and organisational.

I've never been a person who liked a long list of rules.

Like, you can't do this. You can't do this. You can't do this. One of my daughters went to a country other than the US, I called her one time and said, how you doing? And she said: I'm in a country for a year now. And they should make signs that say what you can do and it'd be shorter than the signs that say what you can't do.

So that impacted me. Obviously there were laws that were dictating that in countries.

So for me, the list of rules is short. One rule that I think covers almost everything is. Only do things that show respect. For your team. For yourself. For our university. For our athletic department. For our country.

Only do things that show respect.

And sometimes that's impossible. You're in situations where it's really difficult to do that and your emotions overwhelm you. Those are regretful moments.

Because even when you think, things are at their worst, you can still find a way to react respectfully.

So be on time. I don't really need to say that. We said this time is when we were getting together. So be respectful and be there on time. So show respect.

And if you're doing something that doesn't, you should be called out for it. Because you're part of a group.

And the group can't exist without following rules. Because without the rules, it's really difficult. We get challenged to be respectful. But the bottom line is be respectful.

In terms of volleyball. One of the things that I found that I leaned on pretty heavily is: not everybody likes to communicate. I might be shy. Or I might be arrogant.

There are different reasons, different people are not very good communicators. But there's too many people on a volleyball court. You can't function system wise and strategically, if you have people who can't follow communication rules.

When you go to cover a hitter, there are rules. People have to be in places and people have to have jobs. Or when we go to line up in a rotation. There's rules. You have to follow them. So communicate.

Then when you get more advanced. You see things, if you're watching. The weakest skill in volleyball is reading and vision, in my opinion. The people that can read, the great beach players, they see everything. They have to. Otherwise, the court's too big.

In volleyball. If you're a hitter and you see the blocker, you see defenders. Or when you're a digger and you're looking at the hitter, as they're approaching preparing to hit. Or you watch a setter to read what direction to go. You don't just look at them.

You really watch them and read the situation. The more oftentimes you read, the more your brain gets it in here of what's going to happen next because I've seen this a thousand times before.

If you can't say it, you didn't see it. Or you're hurting the team because you're choosing not to say it.

I don't care if you're shy. Say what you see.

On serve receive. If you're not passing and you're a passer, you have to be telling the person what's going on. Serve receive in women's volleyball, the hardest ball to pass isn't side to side. It's the one that's going to hit your toes or hit your head because of what happens flight wise. That's the hardest to read.

Well, who has the best look? The person that's over on area one and I'm an area five and they can see it from the side. They know if it's short or deep. So tell them. The people that are quiet and can't do that, they're too into themselves. You didn't pass very well, you all of a sudden get in your mind. And when you get inside your head, your mouth doesn't work.

So one of the rules I really believe in is coming up with exact things you're supposed to say in the game. When you're supposed to say them.

So that you can help your team and keep your brain engaged. Because if you're not reading, you can't talk, you don't see anything. You can't help. But if you're reading and don't say it, you're choosing to hurt your team.

So, that's like a playing rule for me. What are the rules of what we say. And hold yourself accountable for whether you're doing it or not.

Matias: Everything comes down to just basic human behavior of being respectful to yourself, the situation you're in and the people around you. That's the most easy to forget for some people. Like we talked about earlier. It's a lot about me. How do I look. In a team sport, that's the worst kind of person you can be.

And that's what why volleyball is so great. It takes amazing human interaction.

Can I tell a little story? One of the things I believe in when you're talking about culture and how to get people to work together, I always try to draw a picture for my teams or when I talk about volleyball.

Here in the States, when you're coaching a college team, when your season starts, you can't add anybody. You can't go draft someone or pay them to come in. You're done once you start your season. But you do lose people because of injury or whatever else.

There's a pile of talent that is our team. It dictates how good we are. How much we will be successful. As you go through the season, this pile has to grow. Figuratively, it has to be three times as big in order for you to achieve your success goals. For you to win. Or win the national championship. Or whatever you're trying to do.

It has to grow. It's like a beating heart. It grows and then it shrinks. It grows and then it shrinks. There's only two ways to make the pile grow.

One is through hard work. You're in the gym. You're dedicated. You're driven to work hard. To get better at skills. To get better at systems. To get better at strategy. To make your IQ grow. That's what you can do.

But the most powerful way to make the pile grow is human interaction. That you and I pass next to one another and the first day we don't know what we're doing.

And on the 50th day, we know exactly what we're going to do between us. And that made our team how much better? This much. Between setter and hitter, the setter learning what the hitter needs tempo wise and location wise in different situations.

As that connection grows. The pile grows. So you always have to be paying attention to that pile.

And the most important thing is how we interact as humans. And every time we interact negatively, we cause communication and improvement to stop. The pile shrinks.

For me, this is really, really important in team sports. So that's my story. That's how I would describe it.

That's a perfect bridge to ask a question about team management. With the transfer portal being a big thing now, coaches need to learn how to manage completely different teams year over year.

Do you have any methods or frameworks that could be interesting to coaches out there?

Even before the portal. Pretty much all teams, except when someone gets hurt or you red shirt them or sit them out for a year, they're only there for four years.

So every four years they leave. And it goes through cycles. You might have a class that is really good and then they're gone. Or you might have a great leader on your team as a freshman. Who just immediately starts to change your culture for the better. Because they know how to communicate with people.

One of the hardest things in women's volleyball is to demand of others.

You have to push each other or you can't get where you want to go. But demanding of others is very risky. Because they might not talk to you for two weeks if you get on them.

You don't have to get on people, but you have to demand and you have to find a way to do it.

So every team changes dramatically. If you have four seniors who leave, you have four or five freshmen coming in. And maybe one or two coaches change. Well, that's a dramatic change in the culture in this pile that I was talking about.

So every year to me, part of the joy of coaching after so many years was every year is going to be different.

Professionally, I know it's even multiplied by whatever. So much different. But in college, it's grown now with the portal because people change places. It's not just four players, it maybe is half of your team that changes every year.

In order to be successful at that. I think you have to search for your team's identity.

You have to really pay attention to who this group is. What motivates them. How are they going to get along the best. Who among the players will help you drive the train? Who's going to follow? Who's going to be against the tide, that inadvertently or maybe purposefully make it get worse. Because that happens when people aren't helping the team.

So first is search for the team's identity. And then you have to search for each player's identity.

I don't think, I could always coach the same. I think there are some coaches who coach every group the same and all the players had to fit into them. There's a lot of successful coaches that are like that. I think that's getting harder to do.

That gets harder more and more because of our society and the big changes in teams.

You have to see the lay of the land and decide now what your approach is.

And I think that's a coaching skill. We have all these different things that are coaching skills. I think reading the situation you're in is really critical in terms of the personnel.

For a lot of years, I didn't look for the team's identity. I thought I was good at looking at each player. And seeing how to help them. What to do for them. That kind of thing. Which I think is critical.

But I think it's also really critical and that grew in my brain, that I needed to find the team's identity too.

So some teams, let's say the way we prepare for games, I could be very serious. This is our task and this is our game plan. And there are other teams that, they don't want to hear that. They already know that, they studied them, so they know what we have to do. Before the game they don't want to talk about that. They want to turn the music on and dance. Let them.

But as a coach, it's hard to do that. Most coaches wouldn't let that happen because they would not want to lose that much control. But the thing that will help this group be best is just to be relaxed and loose.

So that's a way to look at it. The identity of the team and the players, I think is critical.

There are many pro teams, the richer ones, that totally negate building an identity. They try to get away from that, or being blind to that with 'just' contracting the best players. Not realizing they are 'buying' an entire new roster year over year over year.

Even in pro sports. Anybody who denies that the state of the culture in a program matters, they don't know what they're talking about.

In my opinion right now. I don't care whether you buy players or not. If the culture isn't good. They're not staying. They're not happy. They're not going to play at the level you want them to play at. Because it's just too much negative.

That's team sports. Tennis and golf may be different. They're pretty individual. But some of the sports that are individual, like swimming and gymnastics. Those are the most together teams you could find. And it helps their performance.

You watch a gymnastics meet. The celebration. The identity. When one player goes out onto the mat, it's a feeling that the whole team is being represented. There's no sport that displays that better than gymnastics. In my opinion.

So team sports has to be more than that. Gymnastics, they're going on the beam all by themselves.

In volleyball, the six players that are out on the court, if they're not in a rhythm together, they can never perform at the level.

We're getting more and more examples of that. In the area I'm in, the Golden State Warriors in the NBA are an example. They have a coach that's trying to create a culture. Not just who the highest paid players are, even though they have some that make a lot of money, they've bought some players.

But each year you hear them talking about their culture. And how it motivates them to be the success that they are. And even helps the greatest players be part of a team that where they can help their teammates.

This is very interesting. A lot of thought is put into this now.

And I think the more you pay attention to it, the better coach you can be.

Part 2 of John's Masterclass is dropping next Sunday.



