===== SESSION: https://volleybrains.com/john-dunning-2/ =====

----- VIDEOS -----
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=F1hVH3YebgA
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cp8jLK4Nh80
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gmwWT_ZU9r0
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cuGm0yTDezM
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=D5j0uGxmnzE
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KsC-ybqExpc
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4_ALavXtpzY
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KsWy1L3P8Jk
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0PQ5WnN78e4
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4zaWybHGrZg
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AE4ckBcZVqY
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CYI2dzTpBrc
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_7B-qaSor5M
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=aKleJECMsT0

----- TEXTO -----
65. John Dunning: My team is a reflection of me.

In this Masterclass we feature John Dunning. John is one of only two Division I college volleyball coaches to have won NCAA championships at two different schools. And has guided his teams to 5 NCAA championships.

This is part 2 of our Masterclass with John Dunning. Last week we featured part 1.

In this Masterclass John talks about:

John's concept of continuous improvement

Why we need to improve the 3 weakest skills in US volleyball

Which are the 5 most important player characteristics

The number one thing John excelled in and helped remove other coaching weaknesses

Why thinking you know it all is an expensive mistake to make

and so much more, ...

There are 14 video clips in the Masterclass with over 30 minutes of answers by Coach Dunning.

Before we get this started a last and big thanks to coach Dunning for his availability.

Enter John.

When preparing a new game (next weekend), how does your general approach look like and did you ever change your approach? Why did you change and was the outcome beneficial?

In the States college volleyball seasons are maybe four months long. That's from starting practice to end of play, before the playoffs.

If you're one of the better teams, you're going to play a little longer. Let's say it's 16 weeks long. Four months. Something like that.

My number one goal in my mind and when I talked to my staff was that if we can really accomplish the goal of improving every week, we will be better than almost everybody we play. Because it's almost impossible to do.

No matter what happens. Injuries. Games. Whatever the thing that might cause it to get off track. Because they will happen.

But you still have to find a way to get better every week. Or someone else caught up with you. Because they got better that week.

So we tried to be the team that even through the playoffs, even through that last week, we were getting better. In whatever way we could.

That's really, really hard.

But one of the things that interferes is preparing for opponents. If you prepare for an opponent, you're raising your IQ. You're learning more about the game. That's for sure.

But if all you do for a week is prepare for an opponent or opponents for the weekend, well you don't continue the process. When you're working on things in practice, you also have things you have to practice for that opponent.

You also have things you have to cycle through your practices. Because if you don't do it once a week, you get worse at it. It's not ingrained yet. You have too many new people. You don't know the system well enough. Your connection with your offense isn't there yet. There are things that, you've got to practice.

If you get distracted with just game preparation and drop those. You're not going to get better that week. We were very careful to say:

Our process is: we're going to prepare for this team. But the more important thing. Almost every week. Not every week, because some games are way more important than others. Is to get better this week.

And what are we doing to make sure we did?

So we have to have weekly staff meetings. Where we're talking about: what just happened. What's coming up next. What do we do to get better this week? And what do we do to get ready for our opponents.

The next thing is, how we study the game. I grew and changed over the years. Most of my career coaches did the bulk of this job. They watched video constantly. They prepared scouting reports, hours was put into all that stuff. Think of football. I hear stories about football. About the ridiculous hours that everybody puts in to prepare.

Only...the athletes don't.

So what I decided to do is change the process. And do everything I could to have a process that engaged the athletes in their preparations. We got smart people. They all have phones and computers. They can sit in class, if they want to; or sit at lunch on their phone and study the opponent. They can do it whenever they want to.

Not that I wanted them to do it instead of paying attention in class. But they can choose to do it how they would want. And that's the life they want. They want to make that choice. If the choice is, I am (the coach) going to do it. They're not making that choice. They are not making a full commitment to learn this opponent.

And they won't learn it as well, if I tell them. As they would if they saw it and made the decision themselves.

It could be a middle blocker group got together. Or they did it on their own. Or the seniors got together and the juniors.

We came up with different ways for them that week to study the game. But by a certain time, every kid had to send in their game plan for their position. Cause it's different for each person. Then what my staff would do, we all had jobs divided. They gave me information that they thought was important for what part of the game they paid attention to.

We usually had someone who's in charge of our offense. They had to study the other team's defense. Who's in charge of the other team's offense, because they were in charge of our defense. The 'serve receive' serving game and so on.

I had my general overview of what I looked at, and they would all have a timeline, they had to give it to me by.

I would put the game plan together.

Most of the game plan was what the athletes said. So that they would know I read it. I paid attention. That I thought it was important.

And that would hopefully motivate them to work hard at this part of the game. Because when you're studying and trying to come up with a game plan, it makes you a better player if you look at it seriously enough that it gets in your head. Because that helps teach you how to play the game. I believe.

But it takes reps. It takes time. You got to do it over and over and over again for you to go: Oh, I've seen this before. I know what to do here. That's a sign that your IQ has gone up.

So for me game preparation changed. I tried to put the bulk of it on the athletes. So that they would learn more about the game and thereby learn more about their opponent. And be ready to play.

The other thing is. In terms of approach. Is having the program learn that if you want to win the big game, you have to learn about staying in character.

That if you're going to play a match at this part of the season and then play in what we call our final four. In this part of the season, no one's paying attention. This part of the season, everyone's paying attention. And the pressure grows. All of a sudden ESPN is all over you.

If you're not careful, you're out of character over here. Because there's too many distractions going on. And that's why bad performance happens at that point. Compared to over here.

Throughout the whole process, we have to teach them how to stay in character.

I was even so extreme about it that at the key points of the season I would have pick one of my coaches and they'd have to watch me. I was their job that week.

So that as the pressure grew, they were supposed to tell me if I was staying in character or not. And if I wasn't, they were supposed to tell me to change my attitude.

Which is kind of threatening for an assistant to do that to the head coach. But that was their job.

Because my team is going to be a reflection of me.

If I'm a maniac, pressured, nervous person for the big game. They're going to be worse.

I want me to be in character, for them to learn how to be in character. I think that's a great part of performing the best you can perform in big moments.

The future of volleyball, from a technical point of view, how will the game evolve according to your opinion? Or what are you hoping for that the game will look like? What is needed to get there?

In the United States, that's the only situation I really have a good grasp of. So I'm just speaking from that point of view.

In the US I believe the three weakest skills are serving, passing and blocking.

In the next period of time, the necessity dictates that those are the ones we pay attention to.

The rest of the world is ahead of us in some of those areas.

Karch came out and said 10 years ago, we don't pass well enough. When they go from college to international, we don't pass well enough. You could think about however you want it to. But the way he communicated to me and I think he said, generally, is that's because we don't serve well enough.

Serving is the weakest, stupidest skill in volleyball. The women's game is still float. It's not spin. And it's because you can serve a ball over in almost any way. From the time you're a little kid, you can be horrible at the skill, but still serve serves in.

Everybody's happy when you're younger and you don't make mistakes. But that doesn't mean you develop any kind of skill.

You need to be skilled in order to serve a ball within six inches of the top of the net every time with high velocity and have it go in. This is what passers don't like the most, speed and close closeness to the top of the net. Location matters a lot for sure. But you have to have really good skill.

You have to be a great tosser. You have to be great when you're moving because it's all about jump float serving. You have to be great at a very consistent flat trajectory contact. If you do this with your hand and go over it. Or it's back behind you. The trajectory of the ball is going to change easily.

That just means you have bad skill. And you can't serve tough enough. So we're finally learning in this country how to serve tougher.

If we do it for five more years, we'll pass better internationally. And passing, I think there's a lot of good things about passing. I think people understand the platform. We understand how to move our feet. We just suck at reading.

Reading starts way before the server serves. It starts with where they look. It starts with how they place themselves on the court. Very few people aim here and serve there. You can see so many things. You can see the energy they put into the ball. You can see if it's going to drop in front of you or drive you deep.

And if you don't see that, you're not good enough.

You have to know how to position your ball for whether the ball is in front of you. Or at you. Or high at you. Passing has to improve.

Blocking has been the skill, in my opinion, that lags the furthest behind. Because it's kind of like a product of offensive systems.

We block according to the offense that we're facing. How we blocked 10 years ago doesn't even apply to how we block now. Certainly 20 years ago. It's crazy, it's so different. Because the offense is so fast now. If you tried to move that way and think that way, it wouldn't work.

Those three skills are how the game is going to change. Because they're dictating that the game has to change. Or the game is changing, dictating that those have to change.

So that's where I think the biggest change will come. The thought process part of it.

The other thing I think is coaches who aren't learning a lot about culture. About how to get players to motivate one another. To hold each other accountable and have it still be positive and healthy. I think the program who fail at that will fall behind.

Coaches who can create an atmosphere in a situation where it's safe, but driven, are going to make it so that teams can push themselves forward.

Not understanding culture means you're not paying attention to the world right now.

This brings me the concept of 'the platform'. For some a hot topic. Arguably the weight being giving to what is a small part of a bigger skill has been blown out of proportion. Maybe because it's an easy cue to 'call', by coaches of any level.

That's where we get off track in sports once in a while. If somebody along the way says, this is what we need to pay attention to. These are the details, and the whole country does it. Like Toshi when he coached the USA team.

He was very much into physical details, well then that's what we teach. It's which foot's forward, da, da, da, da, da, da. No, be an athlete. Put your body in a position that it makes sense that the ball will go in that direction.

There are very few passers that have a bad platform when the ball hits them. Europe, USA, whatever. The ball with good passers looks like it's going to go where it goes. So that's what the platform is.

It's formed with your body and your arms. But more important than that, but a harder detail is what you see. What your brain is processing to tell you to move your feet back. One of the problems in the US is that if you watch a typical video tape nobody moves more than one step ever to pass a ball.

If it's deep on them, they just stand up. They never move back. We want them to have good footwork. But we don't train their eyes and their brain to work in a way that tells our feet where we're going. Even if we do it right, you still have to know where to go to make it so that the platform is in a good position to be formed with your body.

I did it backwards for a long time. I dealt in the physical details of how you stand, what your body does. Rather than, this is really a feel skill. Feel with your body how to position everything. So that the ball can go where it's supposed to go.

You can't do it if your eyes aren't good. Period.

You can't be a good passer unless you can see great.

And everybody can be trained to do that. It doesn't have to do with visual acuity. It has to do with what you watch and how you watch it. So I agree with you.

According to you, what rule change is necessary? And why would you want to see this rule implemented?

It's a good question. We've gone through in the last 30 years, a lot of rule changes. Every one of them was questioned by everyone. And they've all helped. There was never a bad decision made.

Status quo is what people want to be comfortable with.

There are a couple of rule changes though that could be interesting.

I never liked the fact that at match point after playing for three hours, the server can serve the ball, hit the top of the tape and have it drop in the court and win that way.

Tennis has the let serve, and you reserve. I think that's awesome. I think having let serve in volleyball could help the game be better. In the key moments of the game. Not that it comes up that often, but I think that might help.

A couple other things that I think could help the women's game, because the game is now being dictated by outside hitters out of system; maybe internationally more by back row opposites. But the game is dictated by the out of system game. Who can do that the best is going to have the best chance to win.

So allowing libero's to handset wherever they want to could make it so that the offense gets better. Because in the women's game the more we can encourage offense to get better, at this point, it still helps the game.

I don't think it helps the men's game to do anything that would encourage the offense to get better.

But in the women's game, encouraging that I think is a good thing. It makes it more exciting. Rallies help. But I think kills help too. So allowing the liberos to set the best way they can help the game.

Another rule would be to allow setters to be able to set and or attack even if they're back row. Even if the ball breaks the plane. Let the offense get better by allowing setters to not have to worry, because in the front row the game changes. If you pass tight or you want to pass tight, they can change the game.

They can help make the game more fun to watch and hitters have more openings. So let them do it when they're in the back row as well.

That one's a little far fetched.

I'm just trying to think generally what will continue to help women's volleyball. Offense needs to continue to stay in stride with defense, blocking and serving.

Best game you've ever seen. What recent or game from the volleyball vaults did validate once more that volleyball is the greatest sport on the globe.

I have a couple. I mean, I got to coach in 12 final fours. I've been so lucky. I've coached so many good players and worked with so many good people.

Terry built the program at UOP before he went to the national team. And UOP had, other than volleyball, still hasn't had a national championship in any sport. And they've had athletics for a long time.

In my first year at UOP we beat Stanford in the finals. We were ahead two games to one, down 11 to 2, and came back and won in four, even after being down 11 - 2. And it was the first national championship in the history of our school.

So for me, that puts it in a different kind of memorable. It wasn't like the most overwhelming skill played game, it was just a situation for us personally at our school that had great importance.

It just sticks in my head and it's like, nah, more than the other national championships your team's won. No. But that one had a special significance.

It was my first year as a college coach. And that shouldn't happen to you. I didn't know enough to bring it about.

So that's thanks to Terry, because he developed the program. I think my way added to the program. Because of the sum of the two of us we had something very exciting happen.

I loved watching the US play in the finals this last Olympics. I've already mentioned it with respect to passing. Some players had amazing performances like Bartsch. I really enjoyed that.

I read the question. That one popped up. And so I thought I'd mention it.

If you would have the ability to put together the world's most performing volleyball player. Which (5) characteristics would he/she have.

I didn't include this in my list of five. But I assume that we're talking that someone in this position has to be a remarkably athletic. It doesn't matter what position they play. As a hitter, libero or setter. That's a prerequisite of the group I'm talking about, that they're extraordinary.

The first one for me is competitive. Great players figuratively are willing to scratch the opponent's eyes out in order to win. So competitiveness. If you're not competitive at that level. It can't happen. You can't be that good.

Second is drive to excel. Being driven. The stories you hear about Kobe Bryant or Michael Jordan or whomever around the world. There are stories that they are more driven than everyone else. They're willing to practice harder. They're willing to push their body and their brain harder.

The third one is leadership. If the key player in a sport of volleyball isn't a good leader, then that's a negative and something else is going to have to make up for it in the team. If they're not a good leader in some way, I don't think they could be put in this category.

Now if they're more physical than everybody else by a lot, it overwhelms all these things. But that rarely happens that someone is just better than everyone physically.

Volleyball IQ is key. You have to understand the game. You have to understand situations. You have to understand your teammates. You have to recognize where I am. And what I have to do right now. To me, volleyball IQ, I held a great respect for that.

People that just play and don't understand the game, that don't think about it strategically, well it's way too strategic of a game for you to perform at the highest level, if you don't know what you're doing at the highest level.

The last one. You have to be an example. Bad people aren't the best players, in my opinion. It's a very risky thing to be someone with bad values and, in a team sport like volleyball, be the best player in the world. You have to be an example. And there might be exceptions to that. Like you said earlier, there always are exceptions.

Those five things popped up in my head as the most important.

If you can make the strongest 'starting six' in the world, right now. What would your team look like? Why did you choose these players?

I have no clue internationally. I wouldn't risk doing it in the college game. Because I coached so many different people. I wouldn't want to pick someone over another.

But male or female. If I had one player to pick to be in the starting six, it would be Karch. Because Karch won at everything he did.

Now, would it still be the same in this day and age? I have no idea. But in his era, no one's even close that I know of. And I could be wrong on that. But for me, he's the one that stands out. He's the man.

Matias: I started to watch international volleyball in 1996. Karch was done in '96, at least indoor. And that's the only thing I watched. So I don't have a clue about what he was.

I have a very good idea about, this nineties generation of Italian players. Cause I went to Italy afterwards. Some of them were still playing. The culture is there.

You can watch tapes. But with Karch. I have no clue.

Just looking at what he did. He was by far the most successful beach player in the world in his era. He also won two gold medals indoor. And without ever having been a head coach before really at any level he became the USA coach and now they've won a silver and a gold in the last two Olympics.

That's showing his understanding of the game and being competitive and all that.

And the harder thing is, people are progressing, they're taller, faster, stronger, trained technically from a lower level.

Compare golf in the US or around the world. The people that play golf that were the best golfers 30 years ago in the US or around the world, they can't compete with the people that are playing now.

They're trained at such a high level for so long. The teachers are so good now that there are a thousand great players around the world right now.

So comparing era to era is really hard. And people go: 'Well, how does your first team at UOP that won a national championship compare to your last team?'

Well, volleyball is different. My first team, we hit 220 for the season and we're the national champion. And we had a player on our team that hit 380, Elena Oden. In my opinion, one of the best players ever to play.

The rest of the team hit under 200. And they were the national champion. Now, that doesn't get you in the door.

If you could have a gigantic billboard anywhere with anything on it — metaphorically speaking, getting a message out to every athlete on the globe — what would it say and why?

The world is watching. Be an example.

That's what I would put on a billboard.

What is an unusual habit or an absurd thing that you love?

I'm not overly superstitious or anything like that. So I can't come up with anything that's really crazy.

You know what the board game 'Solitaire' is? - Yeah.

Okay. For some reason, my last 10 years on the bus, on the way to the game, I had to win a game of Solitaire. So from when we left the hotel or whatever or if I was sitting at home, I took a period of time and I had to win a game of Solitaire before I could get to the game.

And it brought a lot of pressure sometimes. Because you can get on bad streaks at Solitaire.

Another thing that I love...well, my mentor, Glen Albaugh, or primary mentor, he was a sports psychologist at UOP. He was a sports psychologist for professional golfers.

He wrote several books. Really smart guy. Helped me a lot in my life. He was always telling me that I was good. He was trying to prop me up. And help me out, because I can question myself.

I asked him one time: 'I said, Glen, what am I good at?' And he said: 'You're more organized than almost anyone.'

And I didn't want to hear that. I wanted to hear: Oh, you motivate or you communicate, or you're great skill teacher or whatever. He said, you're incredibly organized. And I thought that's so not sexy.

But organization can overwhelm other weaknesses.

The more organized you walk into the gym for a practice the more your assistants understand it and they can help bring the practice about with you.

Without your organization; if you walk in and they don't know what you're doing. It's not going to work as good. So I'm amazingly organized and I'm proud of that. It's kind of a weird thing for me to love. But I like that about myself.

Because it helped me to be more successful.

That's for sure. And to enjoy it more. Because I didn't get caught by surprise with things.

If practice wasn't going to go well this way, then I'd change it. And I would still know what I was doing. In games I'm pretty good with that too. Trying to come up with a way to make my team feel different in a moment to get better. Or changing strategy. Or my assistant coaches planning ways in order for us to be different. Or how to attack the game.

So being organized is a little weird. But that's one of my things.

Matias: No, it's for sure not weird. When practice isn't going its way, that you're ready to change things up and still be focused on the objectives that you have. Maybe you change objectives, but you still hit priorities whilst changing the practice.

You see a lot of coaches that practice is not going its way and they become emotionally charged. And it has its effect on their team. And they start to say stuff and have to change things. It never gets better after that point.

If you are not able to change, and improve instead of just change, now we're just waiting until the minutes run out. That's a really big one for your team.

How has a failure, or apparent failure, set you up for later success? Do you have a “favorite failure” of yours?

When I was a high school coach my teams were successful. They won a lot. I went to UOP and in my first two years, we won the national championship.

I began to think I was good.

And forgot that I never played a point. The players are good, but I thought my way was a good way. And then things happened in life that maybe made me realize that there is no way that if you don't continue to evolve, if you're not a learner, you have no future.

And so my failure was, for a while, not realizing that learning never stops. Terms of success and failure happen in cycles and they can drive you or motivate you to begin to think this is the way. Or this is not the way. That kind of thing.

Basically if you keep being a learner. That's a huge thing.

So I got to the point where I was a learner at the end. And I am even more of a learner now than when I coached.

Which is a good thing.

Do you have a book that you like a lot? Which lessons did you get out of it?

Just simply. One book I really like is by Carol Dweck. The book is called 'Mindset'. She's a Stanford professor. And it's the only book I've ever asked my children to read.

To my oldest daughter, before she had her first child, I said: 'Before you give birth, you have to read this book.' Because it's a book that will help everyone.

I thought of that book cause, you know, your family is the apex, the epitome of what I love and of what I would like to help. And since that's the book, that's the one I brought up.

Mostly I read science fiction and fantasy. So different than Terry and Russ Rose, who are good friends. They both are voluminous readers of coaching oriented books or teaching or learning, and I'm not.

This one to me matters. It's called Mindset.

What is one of the best or most worthwhile investments you’ve ever made?

For me, there was nothing else that popped into my mind even close.

For me, the biggest investment I've ever made in my life in any way, is meeting, marrying, and loving my wife.

In the last five years, what new belief, behaviour, or habit has most improved your life?

I'm learning how to listen.

Huge.

When you feel overwhelmed or unfocused, or have lost your focus temporarily, what do you do?

The thing that my whole life I've done since I was 10 years old, that distracts me from the rest of life and the world, is to go play golf.

And now at my age, it's to go play golf with friends.

And after a game, before I go see my team the next day, that's not possible. But generally speaking. When things get to me, I head to the golf course, cause I leave the world behind. I don't know why, but I get so engrossed in what I'm doing. Especially if it's with friends, because golf with friends is remarkably social.

It's a framework for being with people who you care about. So playing golf with friends matters to me.

In the season, what I do is, after a match, whether it was good or bad, I went back to wherever I was and rewatched the game. That distracted me from things.

Because so often the game is different than what I thought it was. That I can be upset because we lost. And yes, when I rewatched the video, I'm seeing things that weren't good, we lost.

I also am seeing things that were good, and or differently than the game made me think.

Like, number 10 can get 3 amazing kills in a match and it makes my brain feel like she played a good match. When I go back and watch it, I get the picture of the whole thing.

The same thing's true with errors.

Somebody made some errors and then I went back and looked at it and figure out how remarkably positive she affected the game.

So I always wanted to be distracted from emotion and everything else. And go analyze what just happened for the sake of the future.

To distract myself from the emotions of the moment.

Matias: Going back to golf for a second. Because it was an interesting answer to me. You said that you enjoy it with friends now and before by yourself. Was it just because the schedule didn't work out? Because my first initial thought was you like golf because you liked it also from a biomechanical standpoint.

If I repeat this swing, I get better at it. This is the result. It's 100% correlated to my own input. And then you added the friends. So that was interesting to me.

When I was younger, the time I could squeeze in with my children and my wife and my crazy travel job would be when I got home Sunday afternoon. I could say hi to everybody, do stuff and then for two hours, run out to the golf course in the evening. When no one was there and play. And it would remove me from my brain.

Because for some reason golf makes me just immerse myself. And then I could get away from it all.

Now. At the age that I'm at. It's golf with friends, because I enjoy people. I don't need quite the distraction from the pressures of the day. Because I'm retired and I'm not worried about who's winning the match or who's playing well.

So golf with friends now is more critical because it's a social event where I'm with other people having a good time.

Thank you, John.



