===== SESSION: https://volleybrains.com/john-kessel/ =====

----- VIDEOS -----
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-SXwbhybhIA
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=q_4jlIwlPrU
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0iyOCEMrG3c
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2MqrPHOwf78
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6gsbdJUS8zs
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-POZoURFwu4
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-zvGdNH-uXg
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Lw3f-nx8y5k
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XPJjxh5TFDY
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=csQd0THJ4Vw
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=W5arDuYAK7M
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Z1VzghwM2VA
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_7B-qaSor5M
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=T0RdNfrkALw

----- TEXTO -----
69. John Kessel: The coach who knows why, beats the coach who knows how.

In this Masterclass with John Kessel we went all over the place...and instead of filtering out John's answers to fit our 'standard' VB questions, I kept the edit a bit more rough. Missing out on some of John's insights would be a pity.

When someone is great at telling stories, you've got to let the man tell his stories. 😊

John Kessel's name is synonymous with helping coaches become the best teachers they can be. Teachers who become ambassadors of our game. A game that's played for life.

It's impossible to give full credit to John's career in a few lines, John served and is serving all facets of our sport for over 5 decades.

As the USA Volleyball's director of sport development, as a board member for World ParaVolley, as a FIVB Level IV instructor, having conducted thousands of seminars and clinics all over the world, and so on...

What John covered:

The importance of the present moment during timeouts.

Advocacy for positive language in coaching.

Discussion on the role of confidence and character in players.

Insights into the development and pipeline in volleyball.

Importance of nurturing all-around skills at younger levels.

Stressing the joy of playing and long-term athletic development.

Strategies for engaging inclusive training methods.

Perspectives on nurturing talent and the future of volleyball.

And many more subjects and stories, ...

There are 13 video clips in this article for over 80 minutes of video.

At the bottom of the page, you can find John's definite list (it's a long one :-)) of ultimate coaching resources.

Enjoy!

On timeouts

I have a couple of thoughts on this, a little stream of consciousness about timeouts. First, it's really important for coaches to understand that every situation, it's got a past, present, and future.

But since you can't control the past, forget about it.

I remember Marv Dunphy in our gold medal match against Russia in Seoul. Timeout at 7-13, he pulls them together and says, "Hey, one point at a time, this point, Karch, I want you to..." And he was very specific about that point.

As a young coach, I was worried about all the things that might happen down the road and all that had just happened or whatever...

Now, I'd say, look, focus on what you can control, which is this next point. Forget about the other stuff. And you also need to be pretty positive.

There are words I want to get rid of in the gym, and one of them is 'don't. My timeout story, some of my Italian friends remember me doing this in the early '80s. Long story short, we're playing this big match, we're winning for the first time against them in 17 years. It's an away match, and we're up, old score, 13-5. So it's pretty much over, because we're up 2-0.

My setter and my middle blocker serve the bottom of the net, then we rotate, and I go back to serve. My coach yelled: "Non battere la palla nella rete" - "Don't serve the ball in the net"

I said okay, and in front of a few thousand fans, I served the ball backwards into the crowd. Still 13-5, then we got another point, I think I hit a pipe, and we won. And in the locker room, my coach goes, "Che cazzo fai!" - "What the **** are you doing!"

I said, "I think you told me, don't serve in the net." He said, "That's exactly what I told you." I said, "I didn't." I brought in a couple of players and I said, "Tell him what you're thinking when a coach says, don't serve in the net." They all said, "We're thinking about serving in the net, coach." And I said, "You're a good coach, but incredibly negative. Get rid of 'don't.'"

Tell us what you want, not the 10,000 things you don't want. But tell us the one or two things you want us to do. Focus on that.

And then, you know, you go out to dinner until 2 a.m. and celebrate the win. And the next Monday in the gym, you know, he almost overnight stopped using the word 'don't.' That's a word that should be outside of our gym.

Words matter. And that's one of the biggest ones, especially in a timeout. It's kind of funny, in a timeout, you can see if the team is doing well, they're really tight. And when they aren't doing very well, they expand out like a flower to stand further away from the ranting and the yelling that's going on.

It's really important for new coaches, and even experienced ones, to understand that nobody's making a mistake on purpose. Stop treating it like they are and start discussing with them as leaders how to lead the team out of the situation. Starting with that next point. Because that's all you can control.

Laurent Tillie talked about character. Once the players are in the court, it's more about the character they convey. It's about being confident, not about boasting or being aggressive. Mistakes are part of the game, but seeing players confident in their actions, that's all you can ask for. If a player isn't confident, the only thing to do is get him out of the game as quickly as possible.

Well, and I think we need to help athletes that come from other sports realize that in our sport, everybody's looking at everybody all the time, essentially. At least during the breaks that you're talking about. Because when I'm guarding you in basketball the whole time, I'm just looking at you, you know, and I don't see the body posture, the lack of confidence of other people.

You don't see it in the vast majority of sports, but in volleyball, you're sitting there on the smallest thing around, a volleyball court with 12 players, making it pretty population-dense, looking at each other through the net the whole time. And you see one person a bit weaker, like the coach said, and the other five may be confident, but everybody gets to see the one whose body posture is given up, and boom, that gives them strength.

In a timeout, you're kind of six starters against six starters with a head coach. But if the head coach starts to be an ass or, you know, thinks that chewing me out is going to help me play better, it's now eight on six, not seven on seven. And you know, don't give them that strength. Don't give them any of that power.

Be part of my team and trust that your practices have helped us be as good as we can be right now, because it's a journey. It's a process.

Bill Walsh wrote this great book, and the title of the book is the most important.

"The score takes care of itself."

If you do all these pieces of the journey, you're more likely to win.

Development and pipeline

It's important for your people to know that in 1995, I did a research study for the FIVB as part of being on the technical and coaches commission. We studied every match played since the sport began. It took years, but we finally got all the data together.

The number one thing we learned about our sport is that, yeah, 50 percent of the teams lose. First off, we didn't do that study. That's just a storytelling joke, but the fact in our sport is, you don't tie, you either win or lose.

In a million matches played all over the world today, half of the teams lost. That's just the facts. Yes, we want to work on the process that lets the outcome take care of itself.

But even there, if I think about our two situations between Rio and Tokyo for the women's team. Karch had a great team, they swept their pool, that whole side. And everybody in our pool beat every other team in the other poule. Four beat one, two beat three, three beat two. We were on track for clearly a gold medal, but our number one hitter, statistically, and in the entire Olympic Games, hurt her knee.

The player that came in was not as strong as we needed for that next match. And we lost, I think, 15-13 or something. And then we went on to win the bronze. But where I saw Karch do so much processing from 2016 to 2020/2021 was he continued to build a really deep team so that in 2021 when the injuries occurred, we still won a gold medal because we had more depth.

That's harder to do at the younger levels. It's easier to do at the 2 percent level, but at the 98 percent level that I live at, you have to take your 12 and get them to play all the positions because at the younger levels, you never know who's going to go out.

Or who can't be there because of homework or a funeral in the family or other reasons. They're not pros. They're learning to love the game through your messages and how you work with them.

You've got to have much better all-around players when they're younger, and then that feeds the pipeline upwards to get them to be more specialized if that's what they choose to do. As we talked about that, the 98 percent that feeds the 2 percent.

Let's talk about this huge funnel or pipeline, that you should have if you want to arrive at that 2 percent, if you want to arrive at that gold medal. There can always be luck, there can always be whatever, but you need a huge funnel to start with, to end up at this elite international level.

At least in the six on six! That's the beauty of smaller-sided rugby, three on three basketball, and two on two doubles volleyball. Latvia can win a medal where they're not going to get into it in the six on six world, but Olympic volleyball doubles helps that pipeline be smaller for smaller nations.

I was doing an FIVB course and helping develop the athletes from Vanuatu who have come so close to getting to the Olympics, but Vanuatu is a tiny island. I mean, it's 180 islands as their country, but they don't have that many players and they don't have many kids. But they can do doubles.

So the pipeline is still incredibly important. In fact, it's more important to do it well there because you don't have as many players. You know, the whole throwing a basket of eggs against the wall and picking out the three that don't break. That's not good development.

You want to keep everybody healthy as long as possible and in as safe an environment as possible.

The future of our sport

One of your questions is about the future of the game and what changes I would make. Working with the sport for over half a century as a coach, I love the rule changes that keep the ball flying. When I played in the Olympics in '84, you could serve and block. So, there was no rally there. But you also got called for a double hit on reception all the time. The ball would shank, the rally would end, and it felt unfair. The problem was the shank, let us chase it down.

They made that change. The hands were so tight, but they loosened them up, while maintaining a standard of excellence. What's important for kids and for the Olympics is that every spectator loves the rallies, not just the jump-serve kills. Sure, if you're trying to win you're excited about those kills, but they don't showcase much volleyball.

In the IVA, we had all the '76 Olympians. For example, Skorek was our setter. Mikasa attempted to make a ball that wouldn't fly as fast, giving players a better chance to dig the ball and keep it flying.

I see similar developments in tennis and even baseball. What I admire about your country and Europe is that you don't have sports like baseball and American football, which attract top athletes.

There is this photo of an engineering building with a sign that says 'Facts, not opinions.' A picture that Carl McGown always shared. I love that phrase. When we play our sport, the rallies is what makes volleyball fun at every level. If you want to make your son love volleyball, play balloon volleyball with him over a string.

The more he plays at his age, the more he'll love the sport.

One of the most intense matches I've ever seen was Steve Timmons against Karch Kiraly before the '84 Olympics, playing balloon volleyball over a table.

I think it was at Bill Neville's house. It was very intense.

I'll just leave it at that. It was intense because they were desperate to win with this damn balloon, which made it harder to stop the rally. It's those kinds of modifications to the game, to keep the ball flying, that I think we need more of.

And I love the rule changes that do allow that.

Again, in '96, we passed that big rule about the whole body being playable, because up until then, it was waist and above. Probably when you played, it was waist and above.

You'd be digging, and it'd rocket off your leg or foot, and they'd call it, making the below-the-waist signal. Get rid of that rule. He's almost exactly where he should be, and he dug it. Let him keep playing. Let's keep the ball flying.

That's part of the joy of what we need to bring to our sport, for sure.

Possible reasons for Team USA successes

Yeah, it's amazing how, I mean, in your case, you're creating these opportunities for VolleyBrains to share. In my world, it was somewhat happenstance.

My friends and I, we wanted to play volleyball, we loved outdoor doubles, so we started a men's team. That was back in 1970, together with friends I'll see 50 years later at our college reunion. And a gal named Marla Borowski from Kansas, she came up and said, 'Would you start and coach our women's team?'

Back then, opportunities like that were rare. That's the beauty of Europe, they get the best athletes in volleyball. In the U.S., they often go to American football, where they make a lot of money. Or they go to the NBA.

Just this morning, I read about the NBA's new mini-tournament, where each player gets half a million dollars for winning. We're not talking about the title, we're talking about an in season tournament.

But on the women's side, there's no equivalent for football. There's softball, there's basketball, but in high schools across the U.S., volleyball is the number one team sport, surpassing basketball. So they get really good athletes.

There are about 15,000 collegiate scholarships for women in volleyball in my country, and they just won their first Olympic gold medal in Tokyo, in 56 years or whatever. In contrast, the men, in world championships and world titles, have won nine in the last 40 years.

So, with 15000 scholarships available for women in my country, they get the best athletes and they just won their second level. They won a world championship in 2014 and then gold in 2021 under Karch Kiraly. The men have nine titles.

How many scholarships are there for men in my country? When you play collegiately for four years, you’re essentially a professional. You get fed, housed, and travel without paying, so it’s like being a pro for four years. Fifteen thousand women just won their first gold medal. But how many for men in my country? What would your guess be?

I’m not entirely sure. I know how many schools are in Division 1, 2, and 3, but let’s not get too mathematical. I would say around 250?

Yes, it’s under 200 for men and 15,000 for women. Under 200 is smaller than the leagues in your country, in my opinion. My brain tells me that this country likely has the same amount of talented players.

Then the question is, why is that? How come they can win nine? And the women have just started to win.

From my perspective as a coach with 50 years of experience, there are two major factors.

First, men play FIVB rules all through college, whereas women play high school rules with unlimited substitutions. This leads to early specialization for women, whereas men become all-around players. One thing that won't change, but it's what Karch and his teams have had to adapt to.

Another aspect is that men have a stronger pipeline. Since the gold medal in '84, Doug continued going to the gym and helped Marv. Marv is now helping Karch, and he was there when they won the gold under Hugh. The men communicate and share secrets, unlike women's coaches who haven’t done that well. They keep secrets, not understanding that 'a rising tide lifts all boats.'

Under Karch’s leadership, this is changing.

He’s helping college coaches by sharing his secrets with all of them, which is raising the level.

That’s why 93,000 people watched a Nebraska match, partly due to Karch's leadership in getting higher-level coaches to share ideas.

The numbers, however, mean that the men’s team will always be impressive to me if they medal because we don’t have a professional league. In the United States, there are three professional leagues for women being created or ongoing, starting with Athletes Unlimited.

For the men, it doesn’t exist. They, like my son, go to places like Berlin to improve in volleyball. Despite this, we still can win medals.

Another thing Karch, as well as John Speraw, has done well is communicating with coaches of professional clubs where USA athletes are, sharing secrets. This helps the athlete improve and have a better experience, raising their level when they return.

What impacted John Kessel

Everything you're doing with this Volleybrains project really made me think. One of the projects I worked on with Carl and a person named Steve, Dr. Steve Bain, was a webinar titled 'The Game Trains the Brain.'

This was in part a response to the common discussion about muscle memory in this country. The point is, muscles don't have brains; it's all about what's happening in your brain and how you can train it more effectively.

The secret partly lies in motor learning science. Fortunately, Carl started sharing this with all of us back in the 70s. I first started playing with or against Carl in 1975, and I consider myself fortunate for that. My coaching approach was influenced by Marla, and also by Carl, who provided me with the science and began changing the way I coached, aligning more with the science and theories of the sport.

Another influence was a guy named Kirk Kilgore, who was on our national team and a superstar. He was the first American to play volleyball in Italy and excel at it. His father and my father were college roommates. As a left-handed player myself, I looked up to him, and eventually he moved to Europe. Unfortunately, he had an accident involving a vault flip, which resulted in him becoming a quadriplegic.

I knew Kirk until he passed away. My kids spent time with him, and we helped him live and experience life, especially towards the end when he moved to Colorado, where he fell in love with a woman in Vail. He had a big impact on me. I still wear number 13 whenever I can, in his honor.

And then there was John Stanley and Stu McDowell. John Stanley, Clay Stanley's father, who was a superstar on our 2008 team. He was my coach in the IVA, the professional league we had in the 70s with two women and four men. I played for the Denver Comets. John was an Olympian in '68 when we defeated Russia. He was a great coach and is still coaching. It's amazing that he's been coaching for now over 60 years and is still contributing to the sport by coaching kids.

But the biggest impact was from Stu McDowell, who created these volleyball camps. And that really improved our coaching. We moved from being court coaches to part of the coaching staff, we spent our first summer teaching at the camps, initially doing things that weren't very effective.

We would spend 45 minutes teaching all six rotations of a six-two system, expecting the kids to go back and perform. These methods weren't fun.

Stu encouraged us to make our players better, faster. We would sit and talk until two in the morning about how to make the next practice better because we only had these kids for five days before they went back to their teams, often never to return.

This environment became a melting pot of coaches where we could apply science to make the game more game-like, faster, and more fun while developing the whole child. We incorporated nutrition, physical conditioning, and even leadership sessions, not just focusing on technical skills.

A powerful phrase for me has always been, 'If you coach the person, the skill will develop, I promise. But if you coach the skill, the person may not develop.'

In my early days, I was too focused on the technical and skill aspects and not enough on the person, the relationship, and who they would become after they stopped being a volleyball player.

So, these people impacted me. Especially Stu McDowell and Carl.

Pipeline and joy of playing

Every European country has a different volleyball culture. But how different is Belgium from Luxembourg, from Germany, from Holland? We would say, yeah, we're completely different. Somebody living in Colorado would say, those people look the same, they sound more or less the same. But from a volleyball development standpoint, resources are different, volleyball culture is different.

This is not really something to publish or depending on your answer also, what I see is that already in a country like Belgium talking about pipeline and Volleyball Academy. So we have a Volleyball Academy that is subsidized. The academy is just a school where a bit more talented players get more opportunities to train. Which is the only opportunity where you can train with a more advanced coach. But the criteria are pretty harsh.

What are those criteria? Yeah, height is number one still. And that's understandable you're subsidized. So you can only take in these kinds of players. You cannot take in 200 players, but some players have a heavy wish to make it in volleyball or to do something with volleyball because they're passionate about the sport.

How bad is it to put players outside of that system and tell them, look, you're not good enough. Because you lack some physical specifics. When we talked about the positive flywheel of something like volleybrains and about obviously what you're doing, there is also an opposite negative flywheel with these kind of situations. I'm not really asking a question now, but you for sure have an opinion.

I come at it like this: volleyball is a lifetime sport. Like tennis and golf and other things that cost a lot more money.

And because it's such a wonderful lifetime sport, we have the 80 and over national championships, and all these countries are playing each other in the Nike Masters games, you know, even in their 50s and 60s.

I want people to have an experience of a healthy lifetime sport that doesn't have really too much in concussions, very low in any other injuries, a non-contact sport, you know, not a colliding sport. And to that spirit, if I were to define long-term athletic development as a term, all I want to do is give kids an opportunity for volleyball to be their sport.

And I want them to develop a love of the game by their training experiences and their play experiences.

I talk about volleyball math. If you have four kids, and a ball. What do they do? Well, they play doubles. You have four kids, a ball, and a coach walks in, or an adult walks in, and what happens? Well, they start to drill.

To get this lower-level experience of the joy of volleyball to happen, well you have an advantage in Belgium over some of the stuff I'm doing in the "Let's keep the Ball Flying Foundation". That whole program is doing some amazing stuff in Africa and the Indonesian area where there are only three balls and 50 kids.

Now, that's not your country's problem. You have enough volleyballs. The problem remains, though, is that they play too much six-on-six when they're young. Too much... Non like futsal or three-on-three basketball, they play too much six-on-six, they adultize it right away.

And this is the experience of a boy discovering volleyball in his first class. (check the video at 5:03) It would look like this. And then he'd rotate. And he's supposed to like this sport when he doesn't do anything. He just watches people play tennis back and forth and touch the ball.

When you do doubles, you don't have that situation. So the long nets that you see in Europe, I use ribbons from a fabric store that are two inches, you know, five centimeters wide, and they look like the top of the net. And I just run ribbons everywhere I can. And you play doubles and you play doubles in the sense that you can put 10 courts on one long ribbon and play five-minute matches.

And you and I play together all the way around for that hour and the next day I'm with a new partner and I'm going to play another doubles day, but I'm playing I'm not drilling and I'm letting the game teach the game and I'm having fun.

To get the school teachers to understand that can be challenging because that's where a lot of kids experience the sport first.

But it's so important for the future of a pro league in a country to have that base of kids who love the game, boys and girls.

When you let the game kind of teach the game, because you're so busy, now you've got ten courts to worry about, not one. In America, in every gym in this country of mine, there are six basketball hoops up.

Even the smallest elementary school has six hoops up. When that teacher goes to volleyball, they put up "the net", and they go into the closet, and they get out "the ball". And the kids play 12 on 12, and it's boring as hell, you know, there's no reason I'm going to say, oh, I want to keep playing volleyball.

So just that little change where, we can talk about it for, like you said, another whole session, but that change helps everything of the pipeline, that whole rising tide lifts all boats. I

t's a big deal in developed countries and non-developed countries to give them a chance to keep the ball flying, you know, to rally it.

The billboard question

I wrote 'Success is a journey, not a destination.' And underneath it, I wrote, 'Take care of yourself, mind, body, and soul, and of others.'

You know, we see so many of our athletes give up because they're just focused on the destination of making that team. And when they don't, they drop out or give up.

I'm fascinated by your Academy stuff, and you said it was height-based. When I think about that, I think, do they check the height of the parents too when they look at this kid? Because one of my most powerful stories and moments of my life as a coach, in developing amazing leaders, wanting to get my kids to be leaders. Only a few are going to go to college and beyond that.

But if I can get them to be great citizens and leaders, I hope I'm making a difference with each of these teams. And with anybody else that's in the same boat, rowing with me.

My daughter, I coached her when she was 13. We won a bronze medal in the Junior Olympic Volleyball thing here. And the next year, I said, 'I'm not going to coach you,' and let her go on, do her own thing.

I was doing a coaching clinic, and all of a sudden, I hear the phone ring. It's my daughter. 'I got cut,' she said, sobbing, 'They cut me.' And this is at 14 years old. 'Oh, my God. I'm so sorry, Mac. As soon as I get home, we'll find another team. I don't get it.' Because she was a starter, essentially a libero type starter for the team.

So, we went back to the clinic, and then an hour later, the phone rings. 'It's her. I got to take it.' She says, 'I'm back on the team.' So what ended up happening was eight of the players that were kept on the team for the next level, came into the room with these four new players and asked, 'Where's McKenzie? Where's Mac', my daughter. And they said, 'We had to cut her. She's only five two. And we're going to the national level next.'

But they huddled up and came back and said, 'You don't understand, Mac has to be on this team. She's like our glue. She's our leader. I know she's not that tall, but Mr. Kessel will coach us again, and we're just going to leave.' And they did it on their own, in front of the parents, and fought against the parents. And so, in doing that, she became part of the team. And she is now taller than every single one of those kids that were on the team. But she wasn't then.

So, this is really important. How do you come up with ways, academy aside, subsidy or whatever, to keep as many kids as long as possible? Not having them be cut.

And I did that in one case here in the United States where we have a hundred kids coming out of the elementary school into one junior high. And that junior high was only taking 24 kids total. And I went to the athletic director and I said, 'We've got to do something about keeping as many kids as we can.'

So, I said to the AD, 'We've got three courts. The A team is here, the B team is here, the C court is empty, or they're playing doubles on it or doing something. How about if we take the 25th through the 36th ranked kids and put them on that court on Monday, and they play one practice and watch the other team and do what the other team is doing.

On Tuesday, the 37th through the 48th, and on Wednesday, the 49th through the 60th. And on Thursday, the 61st through the 72nd. Then every three weeks, all the Monday teams come and play all the other Monday teams from the other junior highs, from 8 a.m. to 1 p.m. And they just play. No officials. They have to self-referee. Parents take them. Somebody's there in the gym watching over. But that is what happens that way.'

And at the end of this entire project, where they bought a shirt for 5 dollars and they played, 50 percent of the kids who made the next level came from the kids who were cut. 50%. It wasn't like one kid.

So that pipeline again is why I talk about success as a journey. It's not a destination. You want to stay with this. And when kids hear that you can play in the 80 and over national championships in volleyball, they kind of go, 'Whoa, I thought it stopped when I was 20 years old.'

You know, no, it doesn't. It's a lifetime sport.

Player characteristics

For me, if I had to pick, I would choose reaction time and reading skills first. It's hard to measure, but you can measure certain people's reaction times. The development of game reading skills is incredibly important.

In fact, one of the questions we've asked in our program over the decades, and I'll ask you, is would you rather pick a pro player who was great at technique and not very good at reading, or who was an incredibly good reader, but not necessarily great at technique? Which would you pick?

Yeah, the second one. The game is about reading.

The reader, and every national team coach does the same thing. So, I'm gonna pick a reader, and that kind of comes from Karch and Misty's world. They played against men when they were young, not age group, in doubles, and got reps like crazy, playing with dad, and in Misty's case, playing with mom and dad. But playing against adults makes your reading level superior.

And that's another reason why I like seeing the father-son tournament or the father-daughter tournament, where they're playing against dads, you know? I think that kind of doubles tournament is a helpful part of the pipeline development.

The second thing I wrote is speed. And I don't just mean that they run, but you know, that they have a fast arm.

When Cuba won three gold medals in a row, the essential way they did it was they ran around their small island nation of whatever, six million people, and found players who had the fastest arms. And then they turned those into setters and players, and you know, three gold medals ain't bad out of a little country.

And it's still part of what you're looking for.

I would look for creativity in play. Obviously for me on my top six is Ngapeth, Earvin, I love him. I mean, I've been watching him since he was really young. He's the kind of player I would love to see.

And I wrote healthy stock. You know, our sport is not 'contacty' so much, but it's still jumping high and landing, and you gotta be pretty strong.

That said, Lang Ping, when she was 13 or 11 even, was moved from the basketball program in China to the volleyball program because she was just too slender for fouling. And the rest is history, you know, pretty good move by them.

And then the last thing I wrote was the joy of playing. I just want to be around positive, happy, you know, optimistic athletes. I don't want to be around negative things and stuff.

So, my starting six, male and female, came out to be Larson, it came out to be Ngapeth, Micah, and Shoji, because I have an American-centric team, but I also look at the setting going on, maybe the Iranian setter, but I don't think he's playing now, and they're not quite as strong.

Shoji is another classic pipeline story here. There's one club in Hawaii, in our country, that has sent us almost 20 Olympians. And that club is Outrigger Canoe Club. And the picture in my slides to show people how valuable this is, you see a doubles men's court, you see a doubles women's court, and in the background, there's the baby court. Six meters, lower net, and these guys go play, and they watch the adults play while they're doing it.

The habits, everything, and when there's a missing adult, hey, come on over here and play with me until Bobby gets here, type stuff.

That culture of doubles and reps and playing has generated, you know, Micah and Shoji, Shoji two, and all these amazing players out of one club that's, I don't know, maybe 100 kids large, not a very big club.

So again, it's that rep and pipeline fun that I'm looking for.

I would put Lang Ping on the court still just because she's so wise. And as an athlete, Mireya Luis from Cuba, I'd put her on there too, because pound for pound, height for height, there is no one better.

A blog I wrote called, of Marv Dunphy's line is titled: 'It's not how tall you are, it's how good you are.'

And I remember the world university games, the first time we had it, I sent down Christy Zartman and Tracy Lindquist.

So the parade of athletes came down with the Belgians at six foot, and the Germans at six foot, and the Dutch at six foot two, and the Chinese, and then the two Americans at five two and five four. And everybody's laughing at the American team, who then went on to not drop a set and win the gold medal because they were so good.

And yes, height matters, but boy, I won a couple of national championships with my first wife, Olympian Laurel Brassie, and she was 5'6. And our starters that we won the nationals with were 5'7 outside and 5'8 outside, you know. I mean, not very tall.

Talk to my younger self

So, the one other thing I guess that I was sort of philosophizing about, you had sort of asked about talking to your younger coach.

Outside of becoming a better storyteller, John. John, you should do that.

I think I went through the progressions and pieces of the game, to training in reality. My manual from the 1976 FIVB coaching manual, had like 77 steps before you set a ball, and now you got to train in reality.

Young John stood on boxes, even though boxes never exist in the game, and young John stood in front of the net and threw balls and head faked and threw, even though the ball is never thrown in the game.

I threw things out of a ball cart all the time, even though the ball cart doesn't exist in the game, and the ball doesn't come from one place all the time, it comes from everywhere randomly.

I think the story that I love the most, though, that your listeners should understand, came from right after we won the gold medal in '88, we're flying back, and back then you could meander.

I came up to Marv Dunphy, in the galley and I told him that I was writing a brand-new book for USA Volleyball called the Impact Manual.

Increased mastery and professional application of coaching theory. It was written to have an impact on a brand-new coach. And I said, you did your thesis. If anybody has a chance to get it, Marv's thesis on John Wooden, arguably our best sport coach in history in the United States.

Anything you read about John Wooden is healthy and good and worth still doing even though he's passed. And I said, you did your 100 hours of interviewing, your whole Ph.D. thesis. I'm doing this brand-new book for coaches. Can you give me in 25 words or less the most important stuff you learned from John Wooden so I can put it in this book?

And Marv says, John, I don't need 25 words. I just need two. Tell them to be consistent.

I watched this guy, whether it's multi NBA players that he was sending off out of his program, winning 10 NCAA titles, it didn't matter. He didn't treat everybody the same, because they're not the same, but he was incredibly consistent with everybody who he was.

And it made me flash back to even myself as young John, who was more of a Dr. Jekyll, Mr. Hyde. What coach is going to be in the gym tonight? Did he have fun last night, or did he not have a date or whatever. Who's the coach going to be? And those two words, maybe, that's the billboard to just be consistent and then shut up.

So that the athletes can rely on you because they don't have to worry about this Dr. Jekyll, Mr. Hyde crap that happens too often in coaching.

Team management

In a way, you're already answering this question from when we started the call. Handling a professional team, you know, handling different kinds of characters, that obviously exists. You talked about somebody like **** before. I would never put somebody like that in my team.

Because I know how detrimental they can also be to a team. I can understand that these players are once in a generation, or not even once in a generation. But I wouldn't want somebody to be in my practice gym every single day influencing players in the locker room.

So, from a team management point of view, how would you handle this? Would you have rules? Would you say, no, these players have to handle themselves? We're pros. Or how would you think about it?

A few things come to mind.

The first thing that comes to mind is being on time.

The second thing I thought about is, where's your whiteboard? The whiteboard, being such an incredibly valuable teaching tool, is not used enough by teams.

Your practice objective shouldn't be a secret.

When I was a young coach, I kept things in my book and would open it up and say, we're going to do this. Then I'd close the magic book and nobody knew what practice was about.

My mom was a first-grade teacher. She had a whiteboard. Haiti had that horrible earthquake. Within two days, there were whiteboards in the classrooms, even though there were no chairs for the classrooms, but they had a whiteboard. A whiteboard makes me be a better professional coach at any age level.

And again, coaching the person is a big deal for me. I don't know how pros do it per se in volleyball, but I know that in my world, I hand out a piece of paper that's a drawing of a player, and on the front are 15 to 20 questions.

And on the backside, when you turn the page over, another 15 to 20. And it's asking about the human. I want to know what your favorite hobby is. I want to know what your favorite drink is. Your favorite food. Your favorite number. What's your biggest disappointment? It's about a whole bunch of stuff. And in my case, I just did it on the drawing of a blocker. And I can send that to you.

But when I get that, I use that to know the person because you want, with a pro team or a 13-year-old team, to let kids be connected to it, affiliated. You want them to be allowed to show competency, and you want to let them influence your direction. Because that forms a stronger team.

And by doing those 3 things, competency means I've learned that you are a very good engineer, or you're good with concrete because of your dad or whatever. And I can bet you we're going to have a concrete forming contest where you're going to be the best, even if you're not a starter, because I learned other competencies of you outside of volleyball.

We're going to partake in that. That you can water ski and nobody else can. Therefore, even though you're not a starter, everybody goes, wow, he's a really good water skier, even though I can't stand up on water skis.

And that whole player side, the relationships. We had, and probably still could have, one of the best hitters we ever had, an outside hitter named Hooker.

Phenomenal spiker. But Karch has a rule that applies, I think, for all of us, that is that you want to celebrate the success of your teammates more than your own.

That is a really good pro rule, and one athlete couldn't do it. And wasn't kept because of what you're kind of talking about the locker room cancer and other things. But that's again back to relationships and how the team bonds.

I think you have a really cool VolleyBrains story. If you got a chance to have Kathy De Boer on who was a College D1 coach, and then she went on to run the American Volleyball Coaches Association for a good 20 years. Then she had a stroke, and she's come back from her stroke, but she is a really good thinker.

Kathy brings this huge organization together for 20 years, all the sponsors, you know, it's a great event. And if you haven't been to it, you need to get out of your compound one time and experience it because you will be refreshed and you will be reinvigorated.

Not only the talks that happen but just the relationships that you can make there in that group. That's a pretty cool experience, that continues to grow. So I don't know how I got into the AVCA, but yeah, it's definitely something worth being part of or experiencing.

The evolution of the game

How do you see the game evolving?

We don't need to limit our discussion to the international highest elite levels, but we can include that as well. What do you see coming next? Or, a better question might be, what are you excited about for volleyball?

Well, I mean there's been a huge flip in women's volleyball happening in the United States on television, which is a big deal. It's not just because of the pro leagues where John Soros is funding it with millions of dollars to keep it healthy and player-focused.

But that 93,000 match, you know, and matches since then are getting sold out and filling stadiums in ways they never have before.

The only place that used to happen was in Hawaii, where they have no pro league for football or baseball or anything. So their men's and women's volleyball teams, drawing crowds of a few thousand people, isn't unusual for a Hawaii volleyball match.

But that wasn't happening in too many other places. Now the ratings are following. More people watched that Nebraska volleyball match than the Nebraska football match that same week.

By that happening, that is going to raise our tide here in the United States, and there's going to be more opportunities for everybody around the world. And that's because we're a pretty big country.

The other two things I had written down, we spoke of, somehow slowing the ball down. But still hitting it hard, just a little bit slower. But the only solution we had was a heavier ball, and then that started to hurt people's shoulders. So that didn't really fly.

So, is there any way to do that, like put some sort of kinetic absorption material?

I also think that you and your wife could lead in Europe. The joy of our sport is that it is an incredibly powerful game played mixed, played coed. In some ways, my IVA may have been before its time, but when four men Olympians and great players and two great Olympian women national team level players played, there was no drop off in the level of play.

It was still phenomenal volleyball. And I think that's something that we haven't taken enough advantage of, in our sport being non-contact. Yes, the men hit the ball harder. Yes, it can be a challenge, but reverse coed, I think we spoke earlier about it before we got on here, but reverse coed is my favorite way to play.

The women are at the net, the men are back row, you play six on six, and the rallies just go on forever. So to have another level of league where your pros play three out of five. And then the women play. And then on a rest day, they play, rather than practice, they play reverse coed.

I think that's something I'd love to see develop in our sport, as well as probably pushing the back row attack line back a little bit for men, at least, if not women.

So that there's just a little bit more ball flying, a little bit more digging capabilities happening.

Three things that bother John Kessel

And the next thing is, I wanted you to tell me who that is.

I have no idea. I don't like these kinds of questions, pointed towards me. I have no clue.

It's the ideal coach.

This reminds me of the thing we did with John Dunning. 😄

Huge!

I had three other little things that bother me. Just sort to throw out there to your listeners.

Go ahead.

The first is, since '96, starting in '98 or whatever, the whole body has been legal. And of course, we aren't seeing anything but spectacular soccer kick saves and a few things like that. But with the whole body legal, how much time in your training do you spend on developing the lower body and your head.

And it's a trick question for you guys, because so many of you have probably played some football(soccer) before.

But my question comes back to, the whole body is legal. How much time have you spent training the whole body? And the answer is usually zero. They just do hands and arms.

And then my question is, well, it shouldn't be zero. Maybe it can be 1 percent or 0.5, but it shouldn't be zero.

Which leads me to another, maybe more important point, 75 percent of the knee injuries in our junior volleyball program are to the non-dominant knee.

Why? You know, the coach who knows why beats the coach who knows how, right? Why is that? Do you have any idea why it's not 50-50, but 75 percent. What might be a culprit?

I would say. It has to do with landing. Landing, maybe on fast sets in position four. I have no clue.

You're on the right track. The answer is the antenna. I'm going to evolve a little bit further past that back to that challenging question to your listeners next.

Would you be a good football coach if you taught dribbling and shooting only with your right foot?

No.

Would you be a good basketball coach if he taught dribbling and shooting only with your right hand?

If you, from the left side of the board, do a right-handed layup, every coach on any level will say that you're doing it wrong.

So you wouldn't be a good basketball coach if you only developed the right-hand to right-hand shoot and right-hand dribble. You got to be able to dribble with both and shoot with both. Maybe not equally, but you've got to be able to do it.

So my question then gets to, how much time in your training are you teaching the non-dominant hand?

And the answer usually is zero again. My next question is why?

Now Sean Rosenthal was on our Olympic team. Pretty good player. He is ambidextrous. So ambidextrous, equal skill in both is one level, where we are right now is at this level versus this level of zero. We virtually never say, 'oh, non-dominant hand now', or anything like that, or teach it.

And the reason it's important is if the antenna is here. And my body is here as I'm going cross-court, the only way if I'm right-handed to hit it, you see all these players hit it looking like this.

That's how they hit it. And then they land and blow their ACL usually of their non-dominant knee.

So the shot that I want everybody to learn is the non-dominant cross body shot so that you can save those balls that shoot past the antenna and have a skill with it. Have practiced it and save it.

If you want to become able to play out of the middle and hit other shots, that's a different thing.

I'm not saying I want you to be ambidextrous. But in most gyms, non-dominant hand training is zero, and that doesn't make any sense to me.

And finally, young John Kessel, to pick on him one last time. I can hear myself for probably a decade saying the following things when a player hits it here.

I can hear young John Kessel going: Reach! I can hear young John Kessel saying: Get on top of the ball! I can hear me yelling: Extend!

In my very first year, it was very negative saying 'don't' and things, I could hear myself saying, 'don't drop your elbow'. And so then I got better and I would say, 'keep your elbow up'.

And I'm saying to your listeners, young John Kessler had no idea of the why. I was just yakking about the technical how, and I was wrong.

Because the why they're hitting it here is, because that's where the ball is. No kid, when I screamed, would reach as high as they can and hit it off their elbow. No, they put their hand on the ball, no matter where the ball is, they're putting their hand on the ball.

So why are they hitting it here? Are they on time, late, or early? They're late. So, if you went sooner, or you went faster, on that identical set, where will the ball be? Higher. And where will you hit it? At full extension.

So, to your listeners...look at the number of times you may have commented technically to an athlete, when in reality, they were in the wrong place at the wrong time. And it had nothing to do with technique.

They know the technique. They just are coming up with solutions so they don't look like an idiot and reach and hit it off their elbow in front of their parents. No, they're not going to do that.

They're going to put their hand on the ball. And that is my closing concept.

Intro to John's coaching resources

Well, I am going to send you an article called "Decisions Decisions."

In it, I explain how that flipped me around more than any article I've ever read in my coaching career.

Because it's so powerful, I'm going to tell it.

It was in a science magazine, and a guy named Dr. Daniel Kahneman in the '80s, an Israeli sports psychologist and mathematician, was brought in to teach how to teach more effectively the Israeli fighter pilot instructors. Not the pilots, but their instructors.

He spoke about the power of praise and how being negative is not as effective for learning a skill, including flying a plane.

One of the guys raised his hand in this article, he says, and spoke, "With all due respect, Dr. Kahneman, but what you're saying is for the birds. I have praised my pilots after a good landing, and invariably they do worse. And I have chewed them out in the tradition of my military after a bad landing, and invariably they do better. Don't tell me praise works and punishment doesn't. My experience contradicts you."

And Kahneman stepped back and said it was the single most exciting moment of my life, because this was in '84, that they were being fooled by regression to the mean, that they didn't understand regression to the mean.

And so, to the volleyball coach, when they do 10 in a row, their normal serve reception is five perfect. And you see ten serve receives in a row at the top level. I, as a young coach, might turn to my assistant and say, "Matias, look at Cody passing. He's passing great." And the next thing that happens is you watch the next five or ten, and you see him do what? Regress to his mean.

I then say, "Oh, I jinxed you." Or jinxed him, or I broke his concentration because I praised him, or whatever. And I'm saying to your listeners, keep praising. Keep catching them being good.

There's a whole book on soccer, "Catch Them Being Good." You don't need to buy it. That's all the book is about. Catch them being good.

Because at the other level, where I was allowed to let myself be comfortable and change, was that when you do 10, or 1 out of 10, I would then do things like timeout, or sub, "Get over there, sit on the bench, get over there, God, so disappointing in you. What is wrong with you? God. You know what? Give me 10 push-ups right now. Go do some wind sprints."

And I did all that as a young coach. And then after you did the wind sprints, or after you did the push-ups, or after you hung your head, I would finally say, "Are you ready to get back in and show me what you're made of?"

And you, of course, they would say, "Yes, coach." And you go back in. And then the next 10, what do you do? Five out of 10, because that's your average. So you regressed your mean that way.

But what Kahneman was seeing was how they were being fooled by this. Now, some of you may know Dr. Kahneman because he's written some of the books that are on my list. One of them is "Thinking Fast and Slow," and he is a Nobel Prize winner when he took economics and showed how people made errors in judgment of, "I'm gonna save 50 cents here, 50 cents here," and spend all this time of my life doing this, and then go out and blow 500 dollars on a car that they could have saved the money on if they'd done more work for just an hour. And we don't do that.

He's an economist, but his psychology and research in math has impacted me. And this article is important because he notes how if I say this many people will die and this many people will live, two-thirds of the people will pick this living choice.

If I phrase the same facts with this many people living this way and this many people dying, they'll pick the other way, even though the facts are the same number. That's a skill we should have as a coach.

Just like it's a skill to put the player's name last. Young John would say, "Matias, when you buh, should you buh or buh?" Now, I pull the group together, and I look around the group, and I say, "You guys, when we buh, should we buh or buh?" And then I say, "Matias," all I did was put your name last, rather than first.

But in the second one, everybody's engaged. Everybody is processing and thinking and not going by me putting your name first. "Oh, I'm out of this one. I don't have to worry. I'm glad I don't have to think." No, you put the player's name last.

So there's a lot of gimmicks like that, that make you more effective.

Thanks so much, John

John's Resources:

Asking John to share interesting volleyball coaching resources is a smart thing to do. Here they are. (thanks for adding us, John 😊)

Books that Matter

They Call me Coach & ANY book about/by John Wooden
Range - David Epstein
Atomic Habits - James Clear
Thinking Fast & Slow and Noise - Daniel Kahnemann
Coach your Brains Out - Billy Allen
Win the Day – Jerry Lynch
The Talent and Culture Code & Little Book of Talent – Dan Coyle
The Man Watching - Tim Crutchers
Motor Learning & Performance 5th Ed – Dr Richard Schmidt
Daring Greatly– Brene Brown
Developing Sport Expertise – Damian Farrow
Game Changer – Fergus Connolly
Make it Stick – Peter Brown
Chop Wood Carry Water – Joshua Medcalf
The Drunkards Walk – Leonard Mlodinow
OPTIMAL Learning Theory - Wulf

Links and Podcasts that matter

https://www.blog.goldmedalsquared.com/podcast
Laughter Permitted w/ Julie Foudy
www.wayofchampions.libsyn.com
www.trainugly.com
https://thelearnerlab.com/
www.thetalentcode.com
www.perceptionaction.com
www.findingmastery.net
www.changingthegameproject.com
http://www.t2bc.com/free-stuff.html
www.thetalentequation.co.uk
https://volleybrains.com/
https://www.fivb.com/en/development/education
https://www.letskeeptheballflying.com/
The documentaries – Buck, Free Solo and In Search of Greatness

Videos to Watch

Play the Real Game key article
https://usavolleyball.org/resource/playing-the-real-game/



