Okay, the gap, sorry, the shoot is possible on the pin.
They have to be on the third step of the approach.
Okay, so it means for a right tender,
it has to be on their last right step.
Or if it is really fast,
when the center is really close to zone four,
basically butt the feet on the floor,
like you're almost there playing a gap.
You can play the video.
Okay, boom.
So obviously this ball, everything has to be perfect.
And that's why it's pretty common that we take step of ball.
There's not a lot of solution.
You see, we have the big in the same spot.
So the hitters that has a lot of position,
so the block has to be in front of them
to be able to cover the biggest area
that typically is the middle of the court.
And the other thing that happened a lot,
the hitters, they're like to fixing the ball
with tips, pushing, tools.
Things that now are allowed.
You know, back in the day,
you cannot push the ball from the pins so much.
But now that you can,
there's a lot of balls that you see with two ends, one end.
And they're scoring a lot of points in different way.
They're just playing strong.
Okay, typically the player, they're playing this ball.
They're not playing, they're reaching the ball super high,
like Leon or Micheletto,
but they're playing really fast with good ends.
And, you know, and the pins has to be with them.
And this is really helpful.
Okay.
Okay.
Okay.
For the game, like you see,
the pin, the right side and the other side
is not taking care about the quick attack
and the big at all.
Because he has to stay with his player.
At that point, for the strategy of the game,
you can see this clearly.
So they have to decide what to do.
I'm going to stay with the gap.
I'm going to stay with the big.
I'm going to stay with the outside.
So it's pretty easy to play
no more than one versus one.
And sometimes you can play zero block for this reason.
You know?
Look, it's right behind the middle.
The tempo is just basically when the middle is landing,
the other player is hitting the ball.
And this thing is more often in the outside
than in the right side.
Because typically the right side,
there are stronger, bigger players.
Yeah.
And they're used not just for a quick attack
or free ball and servicing,
but more like, you know,
important point,
how the system is set.
At this point,
they need the ball just to be lower and higher.
