===== SESSION: https://volleybrains.com/jan-de-brandt/ =====

----- VIDEOS -----
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SGl1C5TDxeE
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=L_T4OrYJJx4
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iitHDHtXACs

----- TEXTO -----
7. Jan De Brandt: 'There is no elevator to success, there are only stairs.'

Hi, this week on volleybrains we're featuring Jan De Brandt. Jan coached all over Europe: Belgium, Spain, Switzerland, Germany, Turkey, Italy, Hungary. He's a coach who has an infectious enthusiasm for the game and he gave some interesting answers to our questions.

Read all about it below. Enjoy. (there is a form at the end of this page, check it out if you would like to give some feedback)

Jan, why and how many years ago did you decide to commit to being a professional volleyball coach? What pushed you towards that decision?

When I was 36 years old after my second year as a coach for volleyball club Zonhoven (a mens team in Belgium), I took the decision to become a full-time coach and leave my other half-time job as a physical education teacher in a school in Ternat(Belgium).

My father called it a crazy decision. But I was convinced and determined not to go back to school!

I made the choice because in my head there was only volleyball. Not that I didn't like to teach P.E. but training and coaching professional volleyball players was so much more fun and I felt that that was what I wanted to do. Trying to make a job out of my passion.

Afterwards it seemed to be the right choice. Till now (I'm 61 years old) I never regretted my decision and I am happy to say that I've coached volleyball all over the world.

What advice would you give yourself as a starting coach? An advice that is so clear and logic for you now, but that you had to develop over the years.

Follow your own road, believe in yourself, believe in your ideas! Open your eyes and listen to your players and to more experienced coaches.

Do you have a particular goal as a coach?

My biggest goal was always to make every play better, to create a 'real' team ( together everyone achieves more) and to play an attractive volleyball that is nice to watch.

Volleyball for me should be fun and emotional , showing an incredible passion and drive.

According to you, which rule changes could benefit our game in the future?

The future of our sport is hard to predict.

There is one rule that I would like to change and it's one that touches the core of our game as we know it today.

I would cancel the rotation of players. Really trying to get the most competent players on their best positions.

We put the most powerful players at the net and incredible defensive specialists in the backcourt.

I think it would make our sport more attractive to watch and less complicated to follow for a new spectator.

So, you are Dr. Frankenstein and have the ability to put together the world's most performing volleyball player. Which  characteristics would he/she have.

Dr. Frankenstein his choices:

the feeling for the ball and virtuosity of Diego Maradona

the elegance and coolness of Roger Federer

the intelligence and tactical choices of Garry Kasparov

the mobility and souplesse of Nadia Comaneci

the determination and focus of Bruno Rezende

the power and dynamics of Wilfried Léon or Joël Despaigne

Best game you've ever seen. Very simple, what recent or game from the volleyball vaults did validate once more that volleyball is the greatest sport on the globe.

On the men's side:

The last final of the Italian Cup between Macerata and Perugia. All what volleyball nowadays can be shown was there!

The final of the Olympics in 2012 between Russia and Brasil. The spectacular comeback of Russia with Muserskiy’s position switch from middle to playing as an opposite.

On the women's side:

The olympic final between Russia and Peru at Seoul 1988. So great to watch.

And just to watch Joanna Wolosz orchestrating Conegliano. For me she's the best female setter ever.

When preparing a new game (next weekend), how does your general approach look like?

I personally think, but the last 20 years I only coached women teams, that if my team executes the 'service plan' very well, that we've got a big chance to win the game.

Relating this 'service plan' to a good organisation in block-defense are the keys to success.

But to learn a team how to serve well, that's probably the hardest thing in volleyball.:-)

The players do not have to think too much in that part if the game, they just execute and follow the directions of the coach.

The more 'rich' a player can serve ( fast, short, deep, being able to put the ball where they want…) the more I can use this weapon against our opponent.

I know in men's volleyball this is impossible.

What is an unusual habit or an absurd thing that you love?

The last training before the game, I don't like the classical approach. (playing 'bagherone' and serve-reception reps)

It is really hard to break down this habit and routine with experienced and older players who are used to do it.

Nobody tells me that you can not jump in the morning practice. Who tells me that you can't make a small 'team practice' the day of the game?

To fight against these ‘habits’ is not an easy thing..especially at the highest level.

How has a failure, or apparent failure, set you up for later success? Do you have a “favorite failure” of yours?

There is one failure I will never forget in my life.

It happened during the World Championship Qualifications in Ankara 2005.

I was coaching the Belgian national women's team and our opponents in this tournament were Turkey, Holland and the Ukraine.

In the final ranking the 2 first teams were directly qualified for the World Championship and the 3rd ranked team had another chance to qualify some weeks later in a tournament in Poland.

We had lost from Turkey and Holland. So the last game against Ukraine was decisive.

We were leading 2-0 in sets and the 3rd set leading 24-20. But still we lost this set 33-35. The 4th set we were leading 24-21 and we lost 26-28. The 5th set we were leading 14-11 and loosing 17-19.

I cried and was down for a long time. The first time I've cried after loosing a game.

How did this it happen? What did I forget to do to let our team make these last points? Was I too confident?

Right there I learned probably the biggest lesson as a young coach.

If you can make the strongest 'starting six' in the world, right now. What would your team look like?

Not an easy question. Really hard to make definite choices.

Men: setter Bruno Rezende, opposite Ivan Zaytsev, outside hitters Wilfredo Léon and N'Gapeth, middles Lukas and Lisinac, libero Grebennikov

Women: setter Wolosz, opposite Egonu, ouside hitters Britt Herbots and Kim Yeon Koung, middles Eda Erdem and Robin De Kruyf, libero De Gennaro

Do you have a book that you like a lot?

The Tao of Sports by Bob Mitchell. The best one I've ever read.

What is one of the best or most worthwhile investments you’ve ever made? (Could be an investment of money, time, energy, etc.)

To travel and to make friends all over the world.

What advice would you give to a smart, driven young coach about to enter the  “professional coaching world”?

You will become a good coach after about 20 years of coaching. You can have success as a younger coach but to learn and to become a good coach, well, that needs time.

A follow up to the last question. Maybe even more important, what advice should they ignore? What are bad recommendations you hear about coaching or training volleyball?

Do not make a quick decision to coach a team because it looks very attractive money-wise.

Think two times more before you decide. Is this the right team for me? Is it the right moment?

Is there a rule change that you want to see turned back? Why is that?

In the beginning I was against the rally point system because I grew up in the ‘old’ system where you could only make points when you were serving.

Until today I believe that the old system gave players more time to develop all the needed skills to play attractive volleyball.

When we switched to the rally point system one of the reasons was to make games shorter. But also in tennis there are games that go on and on...?

As a player and later as a coach I never had a problem with these long games. If you love the game it can not last long enough. :-) And I know that the fans loved it too!

If you could have a gigantic billboard anywhere with anything on it — metaphorically speaking, getting a message out to every athlete or coach on the globe — what would it say and why?

There is no elevator to success, there are only stairs.

In the last five years, what new belief, behaviour, or habit has most improved your life?

To approach the game like I approach life : Live, Love and Laugh.

Thanks Jan, for answering our questions.

Next week we'll feature Shannon Winzer. Shannon is the head coach of Canada's Women's National Team.

Hi readers, I'm looking for ways to bring more value. In a few weeks we'll implement more video into our articles.

Let me know below if that is something you are looking forward to or I shouldn't get fancy? :-)



