===== SESSION: https://volleybrains.com/dan-fisher/ =====

----- VIDEOS -----
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_4eaddhIg7s
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bweH4oE1aj0
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qkfeUno4g5E
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=p8wYNYwNWB4
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=U_jEOXaXxAg
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GWBxccdCCF0
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ardp1TRcmAA
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pTft3I2scGg
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nZUGewO8fjE
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gCraPjRZqQ8
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MEsJTNOiNBQ
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=z3OCC85yt1s
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LmputMATl9E
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Uz4jEilsxnM
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mK0QK9wWbW8

----- TEXTO -----
76. Dan Fisher: I just want to win the day.

Dan Fisher is the head coach of the University of Pittsburgh women's volleyball team. In the last 11 seasons, he propelled Pitt volleyball into the highest national ranks.

Under coach Fisher's leadership Pitt volleyball captured five ACC Championships and made four runs to the NCAA Elite Eight (2020, 2021, 2022, and 2023).

And he led the team to three consecutive NCAA Division I Women’s Final Four appearances in 2021, 2022, and 2023.

Beyond the collegiate courts, Dan has also been the head coach of the U.S. U21 Team, he guided them to back-to-back gold medals at the Pan American Cup in 2022 and 2023.

In this Masterclass Dan talks about:

How training volleyball would change with significant rule changes.

Prioritizing personal growth over following a predefined path.

The fine line between embracing failure and being indifferent to it.

How volleyball will further improve.

Safer conditions under challenging gameplay situations.

Focus on stamina over grit.

How better listening and questioning can improve relationships.

Offering affirming feedback, not just praise.

And so much more...

We've got 15 video clips (35+ minutes) in Coach Fisher's Masterclass. Enjoy!

Before we get this started, a big thanks to Dan for his availability.

Why did you decide to commit to being a professional volleyball coach? What pushed you towards that decision?

This is a while ago now, I was studying to be either a teacher or a counselor. After that I played professionally for five years, and I think about halfway through year two or three, I started considering: “When this is done, do I want to try being a university coach?”

So in that process, I started working at some university camps in the summer. I would talk to former coaches and I decided to give it a try. For the first three years I was still an assistant coach, I was learning, and in the back of my mind, I was wondering if it was always going to be volleyball for me. Is this really what I'm always going to do?

And I would say probably around year four or five is when I fully committed to this profession.

It's changed a lot, but volleyball has given me everything. So I'm happy to still call myself a coach.

What advice would you give yourself as a starting coach? An advice that is so clear and logical for you now, but that you had to develop over the years.

Maybe I was naive. I was still thinking like a player, I thought, "I like my experiences with my head coach, I like being part of the team. I like player development." I just had no idea how much the business of volleyball would change.

I would tell myself to be ready that, the business of volleyball will not stay the same. But with that, I would also probably remind myself that there's something very deep in humans who want to be part of a team and a group.

So I think no matter how much the business or the league changes, there's always going to be a desire to be part of a special team.

No matter what happens, there's a chance that your connection with the players and that group can still be very fulfilling.

So in a way, putting less value on the changing of the landscape, but more putting it all in on the sport that you love and the connections that you get to create.

Because if you get caught up in, "Well, it used to be this way". Ok, but we're living in 2024 and we have to coach in these modern times. When you're with a certain group, it can still be special.

What are common mistakes you still see in our sport or coaching today?

My answer will be specific to coaching in the U.S. A lot of young coaches ask me about my path or how I got to be working with the national team or the head coach at Pitt.

Probably young coaches should be less concerned with the path and more concerned with just learning and growing and becoming good.

Our sports psychologist talks about getting good versus being good. So, I think we should put all our focus on just getting better at what we're currently doing. Then the path usually presents itself to you.

Another failure. This, I think, applies to any business, but a lot of coaches, when they take over a program, start talking about ‘when I get my people in’, or ‘when I get my team in’.

I think the best leaders make the best out of the team they have. Yes, of course, any business is going to make changes. But I think the best coaches get the best out of the players that are already there.

The final point I have is that I look at failure a bit differently than others. I think failure has become very vogue. Everyone talks about how great it is to fail.

But there's a difference between not being afraid to fail and not caring if you fail.

A lot of coaches in America talk a lot about failure, and I'm not scared to fail, but I don't want my athletes to spend the whole day failing. I don't think it's good for their self-confidence.

I want to set up drills and practices where they can get a lot of wins throughout the day. And if they fail, we'll analyze it and try to make it better. But, yeah, I don't like to set up my practice gym where we're failing the whole day.

Do you have a particular goal? Maybe a goal that you already reached or a goal that is so hard to reach that it gives you daily motivation.

The real answer is I just want to win the day. I want to have the best practice I can today.

Over the last couple of years, I've been trying to ask better questions and become a better active listener. Those are two goals that I've had for myself.

But in terms of the big picture, of course, I would love to win a national championship. I know it wouldn't change my life a lot, but it would be nice.

And I think, with my involvement with USA Volleyball, I love international volleyball, so someday I would like to be in the Olympics. I wasn't quite good enough as a player; I was a kind of a national B-team kind of guy.

I wouldn't have to be there as a head coach, but I would love to just be part of a staff that was in the Olympics someday.

How do you handle the periods of 'figuring out' during the season? What are team values you want to instill?

In the gym, the word I use a lot is "try." I’m not asking someone to change. So if I suggest, "Hey, try this, try that. Why don't you try this?" it feels lighter. Then, if we try something new and it doesn't work, we just go back to what works.

So, especially in season, we have to be careful with this. Asking someone to change something they trust typically means they'll get worse first.

But if they try something new and they like it better and it feels right, then the change can happen more naturally.

In terms of managing the team, I have very few team rules. We have what we call standards, and we do a lot of contrasting. We talk about the behavior of the average player versus the behavior we want.

Typically, I'll divide my season into four parts. At the start, the coaches lay out a document stating the cultural values we want and the technical focuses we believe we need to reinforce or improve.

One phase will be pre-season, another before the league, one halfway through the league and one before the NCAA tournament.

With each of these meetings, we'll review what we call our "championship DNA" with the whole group, with the team, and we talk about it openly. We want our values to be living.

Sometimes in a meeting, some players might say, "Hey, I think we need to focus more on out-of-system setting," or "We need to be more grateful; we're doing too much complaining."

So we make plans for these focuses. We try to have some values that are consistent year over year but also adapt our focus based on what's needed during the season and the players we have.

So, there's a certain amount of fluidity, and their input is also valued. Because people don't change unless they want to. Unless they think it's good for them.

The future of volleyball, how will the game evolve according to your opinion?

I think it will keep becoming more and more physical. The evolution of the game is showing that every year it's becoming more powerful. I think that will continue.

I also think the level of setting from every player will continue to rise, where you're going to see six players on the court that are essentially all great setters.

We'll be able to continue to be pretty innovative with how we run the offense and who sets the ball and who hits.

The third one, I think there will be at least one major rule change. If I look back at how many changes there were since I was playing, beach volleyball as well.

I think it might be that they eliminate the open hand attack. That would be a major rule change if you couldn't throw the ball down.

In the next 20 years, there's going to be a change that's going to force coaches to really think about how they train the game.

Which rule change would you want to see developed?

In hockey they have a penalty box. If someone commits a big enough foul, they have to go for two minutes in a box.

Well, maybe there needs to be a second middle line? There is a situation when an attacker goes far under the net where it becomes dangerous for our blockers. And so, there might be a second line, if they go past that line, they have to sit the rest of the set out.

As a blocker, it's not a great feeling when someone is very far on your side of the net.

I think the best coaches and the best athletes are conscious of this and they're training it, and they're trying to control their bodies. But I think at a lower level, we need to pass a rule that makes the penalty fit the crime.

Matias: I actually really like that possible rule change. Because right now, with the implementation of liberal setting, the game is moving on top of the net. So you need something to counter that because those are career-ending injuries.

Sometimes you never come back. Sometimes you're lucky and eight months later you're again playing at a decent level. We shouldn't put athletes in that kind of position.

I'm just throwing out ideas, like a second line, but there need to be times when an athlete is so far underneath the net that we can all agree, this is not safe.

So we have to do something about that.

In other sports, if you commit penalties, you're out, right? But really, in volleyball, there are kind of unlimited penalties. You can hit the net as many times as you want, you can go under as many times as you want. I know you lose a point, but you still can stay on the field, right?

Best game or most eye opening game for yourself. For sure share your opinions about this matchup, what you took away from it.

Was it two Olympics ago? It was when the USA was playing Brazil. We were down 0-2 in the game. It went to five, we won. You know, there was always a thought when I was a player that men hit too hard. It seems that in defense, you couldn't dig the ball anymore.

There was just too much power in the men's game.

And I remember watching the level of defense in that game, both block and back row, and how many balls were touched and controlled, and thinking to myself that the level of defense has finally caught up to the speed of the hitting in the men's game.

You could no longer say that the balls are hit too hard. The players had learned how to control those hard hits.

So that really made me rethink what was possible, even when the balls are hit very hard.

And then I think, over the last 10 years, it mostly started with France and Ngapeth, when they started just shoving the ball in system and throwing it, my radar kind of went off: "Ok, this is a perfect set. They're not hitting it, they're just throwing it in the seam."

And then of course, with what they were doing with setting the pipe and not hitting it. At first it seemed kind of like a gimmick, but now it has become the standard.

But those were probably the two moments when I thought, okay, something's happening a little bit different than back when I was a player.

If you would have the ability to put together the world's most performing volleyball player. Which (5) characteristics would he/she have.

Fast arm, for sure. I've gotten more into just looking at how good of a mover athletes are. So, I probably would say how great they move.

And then three, jump height. And then the last two, just a courageous person, someone with high self-belief.

But the last one that I've been focusing on with my team in the last year or two, we talk more about stamina rather than about grit or resilience.

Anyone can be gritty or resilient in just one moment.

But I think it's really hard and, you know, as a European, it's an eight-month season. In month seven, are you still resilient? Are you still taking feedback? Do you still come in the gym hungry?

So I think the great athletes are able to be gritty over a very long period of time. That's what we want to call stamina.

If you could have a gigantic billboard anywhere with anything on it — metaphorically speaking, getting a message out to every coach or player on the globe — what would it say and why?

Well, this is probably because I'm reading Jonathan Haidt's book, "The Anxious Generation."

So my billboard would probably today be: "Get off of or spend less time on social media and develop your own values. Don't get your values from people you see on a screen."

What is an unusual habit or an absurd thing that you do?

The only absurd thing I really do is ride a unicycle, but I don't need that for my coaching.

For my coaching, I think it's nothing out of the norm. I need to get good sleep, I need to exercise, and I like to be outside. Traveling helps me gain perspective. Anything that helps me get some perspective is good for my coaching, like reading and podcasts.

When you're in the thick of it, it's easy to lose perspective.

Matias: I want to dive deeper into that. If you talk about high-quality sleep, is there something that you do to get more high-quality sleep? I'm not talking about biohacking, but is there something that you need to take care of to get good sleep?

For me, it's just going to bed earlier. I have a tendency to watch more video, answer more emails. When I go to bed, that matters.

And when I travel, this really frustrates my wife, but I try to, especially if it's a short trip, stay on the time zone where I came from. Which gets hard when you're going on a longer trip, of course. There you have to get in that time zone and go to bed way earlier.

Do you have a book that you like a lot? Which lessons did you get out of it?

Other than what I mentioned, I liked the book "Range." Especially the chapter on learning, I think it’s a must-read for anyone that's in coaching or teaching.

A couple of years ago I liked, "The Captain's Class," which I thought was very well done. Because a lot of times coaches think, "Oh, my best player should be my captain." I just thought that that was really good.

And I like "Culture Code" a lot too.

What is one of the best or most worthwhile investments you’ve made?

Well, number one is living abroad and learning another language. The other one, I don't know if it's an investment, but it's a habit.

When I was younger, my reading comprehension was pretty bad. Even now I struggle to read just for pleasure. I always need to write down notes. So I remember something.

But the habit of just reading and writing down notes has helped me in my adult life just to make connections.

In the last five years, what new belief, behaviour, or habit has most improved your life?

Like I told you before, I've been trying to be a better listener and ask better questions. That's making me a better husband and a better friend.

And I've been into this idea, the idea of affirming versus praising. And my sports psychologist has challenged me to get better at this.

So for example, if I'm giving feedback to a player and I say, "Hey, I really like your angle on that pass." That's my natural way I would normally say something. But then I'm attaching my judgment to that play.

But I'm trying to get better at just affirming and saying, "Hey, it seems like you made a great angle there." So then it's like, and did that help you?

So helping my athletes to affirm the behaviors you want, but not me passing my judgment on it. So it feels more like they are coaching themselves and they're figuring it out themselves. Which ultimately is what we want.

And I don't think I'd look at it as an all or nothing. There's obviously a time to attach some emotion to things and to attach your judgment on things. But, I'm trying to get better at affirming.

I've been on this journey to be a better listener. Sometimes I just ask and say, "Hey, do you just want me to hear you saying this. Do you want me just to listen?" And sometimes they want advice and sometimes they just want you to listen.

And then sometimes just them saying it out loud makes them figure it out on their own. Right? I naturally want to jump to the solution, but that's not always what the person needs.

When you feel overwhelmed or have lost your focus temporarily, what do you do?

I typically think that when there's a big challenge, it motivates me, and I get more energy. That's kind of the way I'm wired. But any human gets overwhelmed at times.

So for me, the sleep, the exercise, the getting outside, those seem to be things that help regulate me. I don't have anything amazing to add there, they're simple things, but it turns out they matter.

Thank you, Dan.



