So my idea is like, if you have it, you're going to get it in some way.
It doesn't matter the coach.
With the right coach, probably you're going to be faster.
Okay, but if you want to have it, and obviously you have to have the biomechanic, the right things.
So there's a lot of things that you have to have.
You know, and live in an environment where you have good players around you, makes you better.
So if you are alone in a desert, it's super hard for you to get out.
You know, it's more about who you have around you.
So if you're going to play open gym, you're going to be a better player, even if you don't have any coach.
I think the coach can make this process faster.
This is my thought.
Because now, all the players, the best players in the world, are coming from the same coach.
Now, what happened?
The best coaches are working in the same places.
So now we have a talented player from Belgium, you know, in a little city in Belgium.
He's not staying to play there forever.
If you're interested, if you're like two meters, good, strong, probably Mosaic is going to see you.
It's like, oh.
Oh, come to us.
And now we are going to have better coaches, good talent.
You put this together, process is faster.
You know, this is my point.
I'm not saying that United States doesn't have good coaches for centers.
It's like, they're not, this is not the most important thing for them.
If I'm a college coach, first player for me is the center.
And now I bring the team around the center according to his quality.
They're not.
Why?
Because they're changing so fast.
The center can decide to quit and go in another college.
So they need to have a team and try to put a center on the team.
But because for me, center and libero, the first two players.
And now, being outside, right side middle.
Okay, this is how I build that.
For them, it's different because the system is different.
You know?
Now, the experience they have is just college experience.
That is good.
But, you know, the game is different.
You can see that.
It's a youth game.
If you see our 18th play and the college team play, okay, they're stronger, faster.
They serve amazing.
But the mistake and the type of play they do is the same.
If you see, you know, you see a pro game and a college game, I don't want to say that sounds like two different sports.
But the decision.
The decision-making, the way you think is completely different.
It's not just about power that obviously you have.
So you don't practice a lot.
They practice not so much.
And the coaches that are coaching you, they don't have any type of experience.
Now, you go to the national team, you have cards.
Okay, we're talking about a different level.
