===== SESSION: https://volleybrains.com/shannon-winzer/ =====

----- VIDEOS -----
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AltyDR1m-S4

----- TEXTO -----
8. Shannon Winzer: 'Don’t fear failure, fear regret. '

Hi readers! In this article we're featuring Shannon Winzer.

Shannon is the Head Coach of the Canadian Women's National team. She's a former player that developed herself into a world class coach. A lot of great advice to be picked up in the article below. Enjoy!

Shannon, why and how many years ago did you decide to commit to being a professional volleyball coach? What pushed you towards that decision?

I always knew I’d coach at some level and was coaching a bit of club while I was still playing but I hadn’t seriously considered doing it full time as a profession.

Even when I finished playing and started coaching in the Australian National League (AVL) I worked full-time in community development while coaching part-time.

We didn’t have a professional league in Australia and I already had two young children (soon to have a third) and at the time I didn’t think that raising a young family suited full-time coaching. I didn’t think it was possible because I didn’t see many women doing it.

But then there was an opportunity to assistant coach with the Australian National team and my eyes were opened to high performance coaching.

In 2016 I became Head Coach of Team Australia and moved up to the Australia Institute of Sport to set up their women’s full-time training program while also coaching the national team.

I liked the challenges; I have been told a lot of times that we can’t do something or why it is too difficult to do. For me, that challenge has been a driving force throughout my career and it continues to push me in my work with Team Canada.

What advice would you give yourself as a starting coach? An advice that is so clear and logic for you now, but that you had to develop over the years.

I would tell myself that it’s okay to not have all the answers right now. That I will find the freedom to coach true to myself as soon as I accept that I will forever be learning and challenging my current way of thinking and doing things.

I will make mistakes, a lot of them actually, but those mistakes in the end will make me a better coach. So sit with those mistakes long enough to learn from them. Then let it go.

Do you have a particular goal as a coach? Maybe a goal that you already reached or a goal that is so hard to reach that it gives you daily motivation?(and some healthy stress :-))

To coach Canada at an Olympic Games and see our athletes stand on the podium while hearing our national anthem play, that is the ultimate goal!

But in the process, I want to be able to look back on my coaching career and know that I had a positive impact on the athletes and coaches I work with.

It’s the connection to people that I value the most and I hope that part is what is remembered.

The future of volleyball, how will the game evolve according to your opinion?

I think the game will keep getting faster and we are only now scratching the surface with how physical women can play.

Speed and physicality will keep getting better with time and there will be more and more women and teams who can play an aggressive multi-zone offence high above the net.

According to you, what rule change is necessary in the future? And why would you want to see this new rule implemented?

I would like to see the game speed up more with fewer breaks. There are just too many breaks in a game with time outs and technical time outs as well as challenges.

Get rid of technical time outs! And maybe we can come up with a way to do substitutions on the ‘fly’ and not a stoppage in play.

Best game you've ever seen. Very simple, what recent or game from the volleyball vaults did validate once more that volleyball is the greatest sport on the globe (for all of us). For sure share your opinions about this matchup, what you took away from it.

I haven’t really thought about this a lot before now. I have seen so many games. I will choose a game from the volleyball vault… because it is truly a historic game!

Sydney 2000 Olympics gold medal game Cuba vs Russia.

Cuba was down 0-2 and came back to win in 5 after losing to Russia in the preliminaries. Cuba lost the first two sets after having set point and not being able to close it out, but they absolutely dominated the final 3 sets.

This Cuban women’s team was arguably one of the best sporting teams of that time and the Gold at Sydney games awarded them a historic 3 consecutive Olympic gold medals… not to mention it was the first Olympics with the new 15 point scoring and a libero.

So I think it is truly a historic game!

When preparing a new game (next weekend), how does your general approach look like and did you ever change your approach? Why did you change and was the outcome beneficial?

How we prepare is always changing with international volleyball as the amount of time we have for each opponent varies, so we want to make sure we are flexible with our preparation.

How we prepare for a country we are playing for the first time compared to a country we have played multiple times may look different.

The information we provide to the athletes and how we present it to them is as consistent as possible so that they can retain the information more readily and this evolves over the years as we try new things, some things stick and others do not.

We are always evaluating this process. We also have to manage our energy, focus and motivation and coaches are part of that.

What the team needs from me and the other coaches leading into games also changes, there are times they need motivation and there are times they need more technical or tactical focus.

What is an unusual habit or an absurd thing that you love?

I do not think it is absurd and probably many coaches do it, but I like to be by myself before the game just to gather my thoughts and focus.

If you can make the strongest 'starting six' in the world, right now. What would your team look like?

This is so tough!  To avoid favouritism, I’ll just name  non-Canadian players and go with…

Setter: Carlini (USA)

Opposite: Boskovic (SER)

Middle: Washington (USA), Gunes (TUR)

Outside Hitters: Zhu Ting (CHN), Voronkova (RUS)

Libero: Castillo (DOM)

Do you have a book that you like a lot? Which lessons did you get out of it?

I recently read ‘Chop Wood Carry Water’ by Joshua Medcalf – it tells a story of a boy who wants to become a samurai warrior and each chapter is a lesson that brings the focus back to the process of becoming great and how you cannot skip over the little things.

One of my all-time favourite books is ‘Legacy’ by James Kerr - a book about the New Zealand All Blacks.

The biggest lessons of this book were around creating a culture of ownership and accountability through leadership and living your values out loud.

(Matias here, there seems to be something interesting going on here, also John Cook mentioned both books, Andrea Anastasi also liked 'Legacy' a lot)

What is one of the best or most worthwhile investments you’ve ever made?

Investing time and energy into relationships. I believe one of the keys to success in life and in sport is developing caring relationships with the people in your life- family, friends, athletes, staff, administrators.

Relationships take time to develop and that is always a worthwhile investment.

What advice would you give to a smart, driven young coach about to enter the  “professional coaching world”?

Learn from everyone, read books, listen to podcasts, get in the gym with other coaches. Watch, listen, ask questions BUT coach your way and get comfortable doing it.

What we do is about relationships and to get an open, honest and respectful relationship you have to be prepared to be who you are first.

Maybe even more important, what advice should they ignore? What are bad recommendations you hear about coaching or training volleyball?

Not all advice is good advice, some is just noise and it can be challenging to decipher between the two especially as a young coach.

If you could have a gigantic billboard anywhere with anything on it — metaphorically speaking, getting a message out to every athlete or coach on the globe — what would it say and why?

It just is a reminder we really only have one shot at this journey, so make it yours and leave it all on the table.

Failure is inevitable, so make sure it’s while you are standing for something (living your values), saying what you think, taking chances, and making decisions you believe in.

In the last five years, what new belief, behaviour, or habit has most improved your life?

To be at our best we need to look after ourselves first- eat well, sleep well, exercise.

I do well with this at home but when we are away at competitions it’s easy to let it go because there is always more work to do.

In the last few years I’ve made a point of scheduling one hour a day of exercise when we are away where no one can talk to me about volleyball.

I still don’t sleep enough though!

When you feel overwhelmed or unfocused, or have lost your focus temporarily, what do you do?

This is where my mentors have been really important, either to debrief and talk through things that I’m stuck on or to provide feedback and challenge my current perspective.

Mentors have been a huge part of my coaching journey and as I’ve grown as a coach the role of my mentors has evolved.

Having someone as a sounding board or someone I can lean on who has been in the game and knows the challenges has helped give me some clarity.

Thanks for your insights, Shannon!

I mostly finish the articles with announcing the next featured coach. I'll use the next week to do some maintenance on the website and fix some issues in the backend.

Get ready though, because a lot more is coming. I also did put a contact page on the site in case there is a question, an issue or any other feedback that you, the reader, wants to give.

Enjoy your day!



