===== SESSION: https://volleybrains.com/al-scates/ =====

----- VIDEOS -----
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3MeereDaGrM
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4ZbYFlh2GM0
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jp0xaMpbZ9Q
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8AoHwUPEZPk
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jn_KmfCDbxc
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AZrGz6hcJc8
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=luzlHRmF1eI
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BzFFdz7S2Kc
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=36L0TsTFTnw
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Ar6URAb9_ns
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wNPmWGAwh1Q
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eLnIk98-Y_8
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xFQnj3BR0A4
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4sfv0iyLD7c

----- TEXTO -----
81. Al Scates: You need to enjoy yourself.

Welcome to our Masterclass Interview with Al Scates, a legendary figure in the world of volleyball. Al's remarkable career spans five decades, during which he transformed UCLA's men's volleyball team into a powerhouse.

Under his leadership, the team secured 19 NCAA championships, making him the winningest coach in NCAA history.

Under coach Scates, UCLA holds 27 NCAA men's volleyball team and individual records, including consecutive victories (48), consecutive home court victories (83), consecutive NCAA tournament victories (15) and most undefeated seasons (3). No other program boasts an undefeated season.

Through his program, Scates has coached 78 All-Americans, 44 U.S. national team members, 27 Olympians, 7 players that were chosen as NCAA Player of the Year, and launched dozens of coaching careers.

In this interview, Al shares:

his unique approach to team preparation

how he kept on focusing on the future

how he sought after international play to enhance skills

how he thinks about internal competition and player discipline

how he was influenced by early coaches and mentors

why we need to prioritize player well-being

how he used losses as motivation for future wins

and so much more...

We also dive into his favorite pastimes, including his love for golf and the camaraderie he shares with his friends and former players.

Enjoy this insightful interview with Mr. Al Scates.

Thank you for your time, Al.

Reflecting on your extensive coaching career, I've gathered insights from various online sources, particularly from former UCLA players who are now coaches themselves. These sources frequently highlight aspects of your coaching style, leading me to identify the "Al Scates' coaching fundamentals." These principles can seem universally acknowledged, yet perhaps their obvious nature makes them challenging to implement consistently.

With each fundamental, I have two questions. First, how did you, in your early days, come to understand these fundamentals? Secondly, for a novice coach, why would you emphasize the importance of adhering to these fundamentals?

To clarify with an example, many described your demeanor during practices and timeouts as calm and confident, occasionally marked by a reassuring laugh. Did this composure come naturally to you, or was it a trait you developed? Some coaches might struggle with maintaining their composure, what advice would you offer them?

In the beginning, I was still playing when I started coaching, so it was very difficult for me to coach without getting excited. In fact, I had problems—I was getting an ulcer. When I went to the UCLA hospital to get treated, I decided I was going to be very calm and take care of my blood pressure.

If I noticed my pulse rate was going up, I would calm myself down. It was easy to do if you just thought about what you were going to do next to combat whatever the opponent was going to do next.

By thinking ahead, I never worried about what happened in the past. I only focused on what we were going to do next.

So during the timeouts, which I took early after the opponent scored a couple of points, I would tell my team what we were going to do because the opponent was usually serving at that time. If I called the timeout, I told them what we were going to do and then how we were going to score on the next play, depending on the matchups, their rotation versus our rotation.

I told them two things: how we were going to win the side out or the next point in the modern game, and what they were going to do on a good pass. If I needed to change blockers, I told them all that. You only had a minute in the beginning, and then you had more time later depending on TV timeouts and stuff like that.

So I had a lot to tell them, and I didn’t have time to be excited if a player made a mistake. He knew that.

I didn’t dwell on that. I didn’t try to teach him anything or how to correct his error; that would have been a waste of time. If the opponent called a timeout, then based on what I knew about the team and the coach, I knew what he was going to tell his setter to do next, so I just focused on scoring. Of course, I told our server where I wanted him to serve the ball.

That’s how I stayed calm. I had a lot of information to get to the players, and if I didn’t know what I was doing, I felt unsure myself. I just looked confident. And since they believed me, whatever I told them generally worked anyway, even if it was the wrong thing.

You've already touched on why it's not good to show anxiety. Why waste your energy and shake up your players' confidence by looking nervous? It's better not to dwell on mistakes or scold players about what they shouldn't have done.

Absolutely, if a coach lacks confidence, the players will sense it, and it can cause stress and impact their own confidence.

Take, for instance, a game in 2006 against USC, which is just 12 miles from our campus. It was a televised match and a major one at that. We were behind and it came down to our last timeout.

The season really depended on this match because if we lost, we wouldn't make the league playoffs. At that time, they only took the top eight teams, and we were close to being the ninth. We had a strong record against other teams, but our league performance was weak.

It was a crucial timeout because the whole season depended on us winning this match. I did my best to appear very calm, which was a stretch because I wasn't. However, appearing calm was important.

We went on to win the next 16 matches in the NCAA championship. But if we had lost that match, we would have been out.

It's tough to appear calm, but most of the time I really was calm. However, you must appear confident to your team. It's very important.

Over your coaching timeline, it seems that adapting to changing standards, particularly those that evolve with each Olympic cycle, has been crucial. Volleyball rules have shifted over the years, and you've been notably quick to grasp these changes and consistently stay ahead of the curve.

Could you confirm if that's accurate? I'm interested in understanding how you've managed to continuously evolve your coaching strategies to maintain a competitive edge.

What I did was, we were dominating volleyball in the United States, so I needed to go to foreign countries because some of their teams were better than ours. I needed to play against national teams and strong teams from other countries, but I had no budget for it.

In the seventies, the Japanese were very strong. So, I went to Nippon Newspapers in Los Angeles and offered them exclusive rights to our trip to play Japanese teams if they would sponsor us. They agreed, and in 1979, I took my team to Japan. We played five matches there, and Nippon Newspapers covered all the expenses.

I had just become a full-time coach at UCLA the previous year, we could never cover those costs ourselves.

Experiencing the Japanese style of play, their speed, and their defense, I incorporated some of that into our program. The next year, USA Volleyball wanted me to coach a team for an international tournament in Taiwan.

I told them my UCLA team was better than the national team, and I would coach only if I could take my team. They agreed, and that was another free trip to play against international teams. If they were doing something we weren’t, I took note to improve our team.

Then the National Collegiate Athletic Association made a rule that we could only travel to a foreign country every four years. No other college teams in the United States, including basketball, were traveling abroad, so the rule was meant to stop us.

However, Puerto Rico is a commonwealth of the United States. So, for the next three years, I took my team to Puerto Rico to play their national team. There were no pro leagues, so the best players stayed in Puerto Rico, providing excellent competition.

We continually went to Western Europe every four years, the last time I won a championship before I retired was in 2006, I took my team to Italy. Where we played ten matches against players making, perhaps, a million dollars. And we found out we could compete with those teams, and we usually won after a foreign trip.

Coaching the U.S. team in 1971 and 1972 without a salary, I had to borrow money to coach the team, I told them I wouldn’t coach anymore and would focus on growing college volleyball. I didn’t return to coach the U.S. team until 1997.

In the meantime, I concentrated on UCLA, took my team around the world, learned from others, and used their best stuff.

That's what I did.

Instead of chasing every new trend, coaches today could maybe really take the time to try out their own ideas and see what actually works. It’s about not getting lost in the noise. How would you go about that?

Here's what happened. The first innovation I used was extremely quick sets in the 1960s. We set the middles as fast as they are getting set today. This was the 1960s, and nobody else was doing it.

Unless they commit blocked, which nobody did back then, they couldn't stop us. For years, this strategy was good enough for us to win because other teams couldn't practice against it and couldn't stop it when they saw us. Eventually, I had to innovate again because others caught up.

I'll tell you how that all happened. In 1969, we had a tryout, and I was teaching in Beverly Hills to afford coaching at UCLA. Our school newspaper had published we had a tryout that day.

When I walked into the gym, there were a hundred people there for the tryout, and I had only one assistant. We had to filter through all these people, and there was this little 5'7" Asian guy. I asked him what he did, and he said he was a setter. I gave him a volleyball and told him to jump set against the wall.

I got distracted and returned 15-20 minutes later. This kid was still jump setting against the wall. I told him he made the team and to come back. This player, Toshi Toyota, who was actually Korean, had transferred to UCLA from Japan, where he was a team captain and a setter. His dad took a Japanese name to get a job in Japan because Koreans weren’t hired there.

Toshi set the ball so quickly that I built a new offense around him. I had a middle attacker, Kirk Kilgour, who was left-handed. I had the players pass the ball to the left side when Kirk was in the front row so he could hit with his on-hand.

When Kirk was in the back, we passed to the right side for the right-handed quick attack. We ran gaps, back ones, front ones – everything nobody else had seen.

Usually, when we faced other teams, their middle blocker was still on the floor when we were hitting the ball. There was no video back then, so they didn’t get to see us until we played them.

We only started exchanging videos much later, in the 1990s.

I just took advantage of things I saw. Anything new was pretty good. When I played for the Hollywood Y in the 1960s, we tried to run a quick attack, but the coach was terrible. He spent about 20 minutes on it and then gave up. I was a middle hitter and left-handed, but everything was so slow. We were running sets that gave the middle attacker time to jump, get off the floor, and block.

In the United States, everything was slow until I started coaching at UCLA and sped it up.

Moving on to the third coaching fundamental, the "meritocratic approach," which emphasizes objective player evaluation and maintaining active competition. You maintained a professional distance from players, decisions were never personal but always about performance and team dynamics. What factors do you consider most important when deciding who deserves to play?

At UCLA, I initially had about eight players and didn't need assistant coaches. We'd often bring in players who were football or basketball athletes, but they hadn't played volleyball before. There was no high school volleyball; the only place volleyball was played was in college. Club teams existed, but only for adults, and volleyball courts were usually available at YMCAs or city gyms for a few hours a week, dominated by basketball players.

So I had to teach new players how to play to fill the team. Which was easier than dealing with badly coached players later on. Teaching athletes who didn't know how to play was simpler. By the end of my career, players needed less technique coaching. Brandon Taliaferro, a UCLA assistant, was the first setter I ever had who didn't need any changes to his technique when he came in 1998.

As volleyball gained popularity, I added an assistant coach and eventually had 24 players. I never cut any players, sometimes we even started with 36 players.

We'd divide them into three courts, using blue curtains to separate the courts and keep volleyballs from rolling under players' feet for safety.

Eventually with four coaches, I'd put an assistant on the second team, take the first team myself, and place the second assistant on the second court and the volunteer coach, possibly a graduate student, on the third court.

I never hired a coach outside my program, except for my first coach, Rudy Suwora, whom I played with on the national team from 1967 to 1970. After that, I only hired players I personally trained. Maybe by the end, I brought in one or two new ones.

Our model worked well; coaches didn't need much direction as they knew how to coach after four years of training by me.

If the first team wasn't beating the second team, I'd switch players between teams but keep them on my court.

If the second team was consistently beaten by the first team all the time, I'd send a player from the second team behind the blue curtain and ask the coach there to send me a player in the same position. If a player wasn't putting in maximum effort, I'd also send him down.

I had a famous player named Sinjin Smith. In 1976, he was on my first team court. One day, he didn't dive for a ball, so I sent him to the second court. I didn't need an outside hitter for a couple of weeks, and when I finally did, they sent Sinjin back.

After that, he was so quick he could run balls down, but when he needed to dive, he did. For the rest of his career, he was the best defensive player until Karch arrived his senior year. At that time, they were equal in skill.

The worst thing that could happen to a player was getting kicked out of practice completely, which I only remember happening once. If a player wasn’t giving their utmost effort, that was the consequence.

One year, in 1992, I only had two courts going. I brought in a coach, Ozzie Volstad, a great player from Norway who came in 1984. We went 38-0 with him as a starting middle blocker. He came back to get a master’s degree in computer science or something, so I hired him as a coach for one year.

He started with 12 players and told me they weren't working hard enough and wanted to get rid of them. I said, "Sure, you're in charge." But by the end of the year, he only had four players left.

Those four players all became Olympians. John Speraw, who is now the head Olympic coach and head UCLA coach; Kevin Wong, who went to the Olympics in beach volleyball; Eric Sullivan, who became our Olympic libero for three Olympics; and Jeff Nygaard, who went to the Olympics three times in both indoor and beach volleyball and is now the head men’s coach at USC.

They were all redshirting. Jeff Nygaard came in at 175 pounds and 6'8" and needed to bulk up and get strong, which he did, becoming an Olympian. Kevin Wong was a middle attacker with a slow arm swing and needed to become an outside hitter and learn to pass.

Eric Sullivan was a short middle blocker who needed to transition to an outside hitter and learn to pass. John Speraw, in my opinion initially, was too short as a middle blocker, but became a starter later and was very good.

Normally, we ran a circle drill where they had to do 300 sit-ups, 300 push-ups, dives, rolls, and sprints. If you were on the third court and working like this, you’d usually cut yourself and leave. But if they were gutsy enough to compete as hard as they could and do all these things, I let them stay. So sometimes we kept three courts, but often those on the third court couldn’t handle the workouts.

I was teaching school until three, and we started practice at three. I didn't get into the gym until 3:45. Then we'd get the balls out and do the actual practice.

Volleyball is an endurance sport, at least until the rule changes. Back then, you had to win a point on your serve, so games could last three hours or more. The team that was in the best shape usually won the fifth game. Our team was always in better shape than anybody else.

During warmups before games, some players did push-ups and sit-ups, that we did every day, and other teams would just stop and watch, not understanding what we were doing.

We also lifted weights, and Jeff Nygaard even lifted on match days because he wanted to. So this conditioning took care of me cutting players; they figured out if they weren’t going to play, they didn’t want to go through the intense workouts. So the only way a player could get cut was from a lack of effort.

As far as being friends with the team, I wasn’t even around until practice started. After practice, I had a family to go home to, so I didn’t hang out and talk to the players.

If they wanted extra work after practice, either I or my assistants would stay, depending on the player. If it was a player on my court, I would stay. For others, my assistants would handle it. That’s how I managed it.

The fourth fundamental is about keeping things simple but executing them well. I've learned from podcasts and articles that instead of constantly inventing new plays, focusing on a few offensive strategies and perfecting them has been effective. Was this approach something you intentionally developed, or was it more about working with the personnel you had, making it a practical choice?

When I started coaching, I was just a junior at UCLA and got a job coaching in Culver City at the parks. I coached boys in football, baseball, and basketball for the 10-and-under, 12-and-under, 14-and-under, and 16-and-under age groups. There was no volleyball at the time, so I didn't have the opportunity to coach that sport.

I took a class at UCLA from Coach John Wooden's assistant, Jerry Norman. They taught me the UCLA offense and defense for men's basketball. It was so simple that I taught it to my 10-year-olds, and we won the Los Angeles County Championship in basketball. It was that straightforward.

Fast forward to 1979, when we went undefeated. By the way, no men's team has ever gone undefeated. UCLA went undefeated three times. And we ran three volleyball plays:

A quick attack in the middle and a fast set to the outside.

An "X" play, where the right-side hitter crossed behind the quick attacker.

A fake "X," which looked like a cross but then ran a fast set to the pin.

We beat USC in the finals with this simple offense. USC had great players like Dusty Dvorak, a fantastic Olympic setter, and Pat Powers, another Olympian. They had so many plays, but they couldn't stop our straightforward and perfectly executed offense.

For many years, I used a two-setter offense where both setters also hit. Karch Kiraly, considered by many as the greatest player ever, was one of my setters. However, he couldn't hit well as a freshman. His hitting stats were terrible, but he didn't know that because we didn't publish hitting stats. Sinjin was the setter, and I told him to keep setting Karch because he would eventually improve.

The first time Karch knew how bad his hitting stats were was when I published a book with our hitting stats in it called "Winning Volleyball." When he saw that is when he found out.

Nowadays, there are no secrets with all the video and real-time stats available.

"Great coaches, they don't all do the same thing. They work to their strengths" That's a quote you used, and it really stood out to me. How should a new coach go about discovering their own coaching strengths? Is it more about experimenting rather than imitating others?

When I started coaching volleyball, there were no volleyball coaches for me to look up to. I played for the Hollywood YMCA, which was the best club team in the United States, but we had probably the worst coach. However, he knew talent when he saw it and got all the best players together.

Our actual coaching came from our setter, Rolf Engen, who was the best setter in the country but wasn't selected for the Olympic team. Volleyball was handled very poorly in the States back then, with the best players often not going to the Olympics due to underhanded decisions.

I had to learn from coaches in other sports. I read a book by John Wooden, the UCLA basketball coach, and the first 20 pages were brilliant. I used some of his principles when coaching.

My high school coach, Bill Rankin, also had a great approach. We laughed occasionally during practice and enjoyed it. I laughed at every practice, and players would often imitate my laugh. Even today, when I go to an L.A. Rams football game and see about 20 of my players from the '80s, they'll still be laughing and trying to mimic my laugh.

It's important to enjoy yourself and lighten up. As a player, I had a great time playing and practicing volleyball, and I continued to enjoy it as a coach.

I didn't coach for money; I taught school full-time for 35 years, which allowed me to afford being a volleyball coach. There were no full-time volleyball coaches when I started.

I was offered a full-time position at UC Santa Barbara in 1970, the first one, and I gave it to my assistant Rudy Suwora because I thought I would be full-time at UCLA, but that took a long time to happen.

You need to enjoy yourself and pick up things from many coaches, but you must be your own person and find your own way.

Having talked to many coaches for VolleyBrains that is certainly something that came back a lot. You need to be the same person when you coach as when you're not in the gym. Don't try to fool your players with a certain act, they will sniff out the truth real quick anyways.

I remember a national championship final where I heard a coach tell his players during a timeout, "We've got to win this first game. If we don't win this first game, we're going to lose."

And that's exactly what happened—they lost in three. I couldn't believe someone would say something so stupid. It just goes to show that even at the highest level, it still happens.

If you could put the strongest team ever together. What would your team look like?

The strongest team I've seen in the world, in my experience, was the U.S. team from 1984 to 1988. They won two Olympics and all the major volleyball competitions in between.

I don't think any other team has dominated like that in the history of Olympic volleyball since it started in 1964. The Russians were the best team when I was playing in the '60s, but it wasn't just Russia; it was the U.S.S.R., which included the best players from various countries like Lithuania.

Their country expanded, so they got the best of many countries. Meanwhile, Poland, despite having great players, didn't receive the same support as the U.S.S.R. Their players were often engineers or held other jobs during the day.

In the '60s, the U.S.S.R. had professional volleyball players who only played volleyball.

In contrast, if I wanted to play volleyball for the USA, I had to pay my way to the Olympic trials from the West Coast to the East Coast and then try out. I even had to borrow money from the bank to pay my mortgage while I played on the U.S. team.

The Russian system was rigorous. When I played in the World Games team in 1966 in Czechoslovakia, I saw a Russian player who turned his ankle but kept playing because there were a hundred more players waiting to take his spot.

That system exists somewhat now with professional players who play year-round. The strain on their bodies is immense, playing 12 months a year and then joining their national team during their downtime. I don't know how the U.S. team, which has a certain age, stays in such good shape and how their bodies have lasted this long, playing continuously, but they do.

So, in my opinion, the best team was the U.S. team from 1984 to 1988.

Given the demands of year-round competition, how would you manage player health in today's game?

I wanted my players to start playing volleyball as soon as our indoor season was over.

I wanted them to play at the beach from the first weekend in May. I wanted them to play sand volleyball. Sand was easy on their body.

It was great. You still develop your leg muscles. You could come indoors the next fall, and you could jump higher. You can play better defense. There were certain advantages, but most of all, you didn't have to hit the ball hard on the sand. You can hit the ball easy and put the ball away and just hit it to open spots.

So it wasn't as hard on your shoulder joints, your elbow joints, and particularly your back. You weren't hitting the floor.

I wouldn't even practice in Pauley Pavilion, our main pavilion, the 12,000-seat pavilion, because the floor was too hard. I practiced in the men's gym. They have a very springy floor.

When I replaced that floor, I replaced it with a floor with springs underneath it. All the professional basketball players in the United States, when they get to L.A., they want to practice in the men's gym on that floor because it's easy on their body. That floor has always been like that.

You got to take care of your players. Playing 12 months a year is ridiculous. What if they get a coach who works them out too hard?

Look at the Asian players, you don't see any old players on their team because they've worked too hard. They peak at the college level age. That's when they peak. They're at their best when they're about 21, because they work too hard.

I used to go train the Panasonic Panthers in Japan during the preseason. They wanted me to work them out hard twice a day. I never had twice-a-day practices for my teams at UCLA. We never practiced twice a day. That's ridiculous. You don't want to do that. It's too much stress on the body.

But, you know, they were paying me to work them out twice a day. So I did it. Those guys were so beat up at the end of the week. But that's what they wanted me to do, but I didn't do it for my teams or the U.S. team. That's for sure.

What is an unusual habit or an absurd thing that you love?

What I enjoyed doing at the national championships was playing a round of golf in the morning and letting the opponents see me go out to do that.

I was totally prepared, there was nothing else I could do to make it better, to prepare the team or myself.

If the team didn't want to go to the gym and serve that day and have a little workout, it was okay with me. It was optional. The guys who wanted to go work out, fine, let them go work out. If they wanted to go with the team and just sit there and watch, that was okay too.

I didn't structure the pregame warmup for my team. As a player, I liked to warm up for 15 minutes. When I had coaches who structured the warmup, I didn't like that.

So when I coached my team, I would come to the match 15 minutes before the game started. If it was a home match, I would be in the office going over the game plan. My assistants would take care of what needed to be done.

Sometimes I would be on the upper level looking down at the warmup, but I wouldn't be choreographing it.

We taught the players our warmup, and then during the match, they could warm up before the match any way they wanted to.

I often watched other coaches setting hitters during their warmup before the match. I've seen them choreograph things. The team with the best warmup usually wasn't the best team. I don't know what it means.

That was just a little quirky reference. It probably has no relevance whatsoever.

How has a failure, or apparent failure, set you up for later success? Do you have a “favorite failure” of yours?

Well, when we lost the championship one year in the 90s, on the plane ride home, I composed a letter to our players. I told them all the things we were going to do in preparation for the next championships and how we were going to win it.

One of my players, Jeff Nygaard, gave me that letter, he kept it all this time. He's the head coach at USC now, I still have that letter somewhere. We did win the next year.

We were in 25 national championship finals. We won 19 and lost six. Those losses were very hard. That's when I did my thinking about the next year, immediately.

Whether it was a car ride home or a plane ride home, I was thinking about the next year.

So every time we lost, it was an opportunity. Generally, if we were in the finals and lost, we did win the next year.

In the last five years, what new belief, behaviour, or habit has most improved your life?

You know, I'll tell you what I enjoy doing.

I have five different groups I play golf with on different days, Monday through Friday, and I enjoy talking to these different people every week.

Two of them are my former players. Larry Rundle was on my first championship team in 1965, and he was a floor captain in the '68 Olympics, the first time we beat the Russians. He’s also a great beach volleyball player and a hell of an athlete in every sport. I play with him on Tuesdays and Thursdays.

I also play with Sinjin Smith, who was the captain of our first undefeated team in 1979, every Friday. He'll be going to the Olympics on the 7th, so I'll miss him for one Friday. These people are dear friends.

In the last five years, a group of my friends has had a birthday party for me. This year, they said, we're doing your 80th birthday party again, which was actually my 85th. Just the guys. I don't organize it; they just tell me when the date is.

One of them drives me to the party and back. I drive, but there's tequila involved at the party. It's something we like here in Southern California, Mexican liquor. You probably don't have it in Belgium. It's made from cactus. Delicious.

Anyway, that's the new thing, that party.

When you feel overwhelmed or unfocused, or have lost your focus temporarily, what do you do?

Well, during my career, most of the time I was a full-time teacher, and then I became a full-time volleyball coach. I couldn't let go of my teaching career because I had three children to put through college.

So I continued to work full-time in both positions, which wasn't much different from when I was part-time.

I had a list of things to do every day, and I wouldn't go to bed until I completed them.

Most of the time, to prepare my UCLA team correctly and review the video or the 16-millimeter film in the old days, I would stay up until about two in the morning and get only four hours of sleep. But I slept well.

What I couldn't do was go to sleep without solving the problem of the next opponent. If I didn't solve it, I couldn't sleep well at all.

So, every day I had tasks to complete, and when I had the answers in my mind, I slept well and was ready for the next day.

Usually, Sunday night, I tried to get seven or eight hours of sleep to prepare for the next week. It was difficult because I also wrote nine books during this period. I would do a little of that each night too.

It was all good as long as I didn't go to sleep with a problem on my mind. I needed to resolve that, and that's how I was prepared for the next day.

Thank you, Al.

Extra resources:

Diving deep into research for our articles we sometimes find hidden gems. This is one of those.

Al talked about Asbjorn "Ozzie" Volstad, a former UCLA player who returned to study for one more year and became one of his coaches. "Ozzie" coached that second court where Speraw, Sullivan, Wong and Nygaard were training.

This is Asbjørn Vølstad's skill tape that he had sent over to Al during his recruiting process.



