===== SESSION: https://volleybrains.com/jerritt-elliott/ =====

----- VIDEOS -----
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_Z3-Om8sKPY
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7FGN5hSE3b8
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9-iRGKtYl8Q
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JuEc8r8Ki5o
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VpuKKQrV08A
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VOLZSDedJQY
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eByfmtnkeso
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qt632L_kJ28
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UguPQrA_Ld0
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zWQX_elyIBc
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3k6Z_9kQjC8
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-sU-YXMflFQ
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=j86ucpsnDKM
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=voC3MRrqMQA
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bEUZUKRYSiM
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NmavpWgJoLk
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OQUJE6I00gw
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DgOhfIbCTgA
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=n3l64pNvnuA
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DbP4x-NAZc4

----- TEXTO -----
82. Jerritt Elliott: People, Dedication and Excellence

Jerritt Elliott is the head coach of the University of Texas women's volleyball team, where he's running one of the highest-performing college programs in the USA.

The University of Texas won the NCAA national championships in both 2022 and 2023, making them the defending National Champions in this year's competition.

What I (personally) find fascinating are the similarities between top college programs such as Texas, Nebraska, Wisconsin, and others, and some of the world’s top professional club teams. But...many more differences exist and we'll hit on some of these in this conversation.

In this Masterclass, Coach Elliott talks about:

The journey of building the University of Texas volleyball

How he learned to create an environment that fosters athlete growth

Why focusing on core values is more effective than enforcing rules

How to build trust and understanding with your players and their parents

How they handle and navigate current player opportunities (NIL, etc)

What he wants the USA pro leagues to learn from the international game

What can be done to enhance creativity and skills in women’s volleyball

How he counts on and what he expects from his coaching staff

...and so much more.

We've got 18 video clips (35+ minutes) in this article. Enjoy!

And of course, a big thanks to coach Elliott for his availability.

VB: Why did you decide to commit to being a professional volleyball coach? What pushed you towards that decision?

I played at Pepperdine University and the University of Hawaii. When I graduated, I became an elementary school teacher. I was coaching my high school team and teaching elementary school. I had some success—we won the city championship in my first year.

Parents started asking me if I would start a club volleyball program. Here in the US, that’s where all the juniors play. Within a year and a half, I had about 18 teams, and we were going strong.

I was still teaching elementary school when some college coaches saw what I was doing and said, "Hey, you should really get into the college game."

As an elementary school teacher, I taught all these cool little courses, but I didn’t see the kids develop like I could in volleyball.

Then I came across a tape of Ari Selinger training. I became obsessed with it, watching it probably 250 times, focusing on every movement and biomechanical issue. At that point, I knew this was my passion, and I needed to switch roles.

I worked my way up, and once I started coaching more and more, I knew this was something I always wanted to do.

VB: What advice would you give yourself as a starting coach? An advice that is so clear and logical for you now, but that you had to develop over the years. (Can be about anything)

As I age now, I'm 56 years old, I think to be successful at any kind of profession, you have to dive in 100 percent and be committed to it.

For me, all I was doing was coaching and training and working 24/7. Time went by so fast. I didn't make a lot of time for myself.

So for myself now, that's a lot of the questions that I'm fielding on myself every morning, journaling and figuring out where I fit into this equation, and making sure there's some balance in my life.

I lost that balance for a long time, but I don't regret it. I was completely committed to elevating my program to an elite level, and in the process, I think I lost myself while giving everything I could to the sport.

VB: Do you account that to a certain kind of restlessness? If you're restless but it's directed, some kind of restlessness can be beneficial to achieve your objectives. So is that character trait a part of being successful?

I believe so. Anyone who knows me would say that I have a crazy brain—I'm super ADD, constantly having a million thoughts a second. However, I think this has contributed to my success because when I hear 'no,' it fuels me, almost like a superpower, to keep pushing forward.

It drives my creative thinking, helping me find ways to achieve success or at least discover solutions at the highest level possible.

VB: What are bad recommendations you hear, still today, about coaching or training volleyball?

First I'll say that I think the younger coaches just want to move up the ranks instead of really investing time and being committed to what it takes to be a successful coach.

I think there's a lot of studying that needs to be involved. I think there are a lot of new metrics that you need to understand. Also, the understanding of how to use the body has become a new focus in the last five years that we've really delved into.

Years past, it was always about training and repetition, thousands upon thousands of repetitions. It's gotten into more of a team play, more "teaching them through six-on-six play". And I think that's where the game has really developed.

Obviously, in practice, you're analyzing your numbers, creating situations for the athletes without them realizing it. You're crafting an environment where they can feel free and creative, enabling them to thrive and succeed.

But I would say the old adage of just repetition, repetition, 70 percent of practices—I think that's outdated.

Many coaches still focus on training in system versus out of system. The game has evolved to emphasize out of system play significantly. One of the biggest areas of growth is in the out of system setting.

Fifteen years ago, we weren't training every player on how to set a ball up, like we do now.

VB: It's a bit of a cliché that people say women's volleyball trails men's volleyball by three or four years. That's not true in all aspects of the game. But I think integrating creativity is crucial. To me, that's a major driver of how the women's game will futher evolve.

If you think about the game, it's 25-23, or 15-13 that we just lost.

(Matias here: the game coach Elliott is referencing is the Olympic men's semifinal USA-Poland, we had this recording scheduled, coincidentally minutes after the USA lost to Poland in a 5 set tiebreaker)

I mean, in a game to 25, that's 4%.

So if you can, as a coach, find some kind of systematic thing where you can win one or two more points, it's really what elevates you to overall success.

One thing that's really fascinating to me right now, especially watching the Olympics, is the fist blocking that the men are starting to use. I don't know if you've noticed in the pictures, but with the improvements in TV technology, touches are becoming a huge part of the game.

Players have really developed this aspect. For instance, if you saw Japan, they've started to use fist blocking a bit more. It's starting to come in. I'm really curious to kind of throw that in and try that a little bit as the season progresses.

VB: Obviously, when you expose your fingers, and they get hit, you won't be able to block effectively, and it results in the ball going out of play—behind the court, to the side, wherever. But a question there is, do you need your fingers to be able to direct the ball effectively?

You eliminate the low shots and the bad swings, but the question remains: are you getting more touches, or are balls just hitting the fist and deflecting out?

Those are the numbers you need to study, over thousands and thousands of opportunities, to really understand how this technique plays out.

VB: Do you have a particular goal? Maybe a goal that you already reached or a goal that is so hard to reach that it gives you daily motivation?

Obviously, in the U.S., it's different. We have long contracts. I usually have a five or six-year contract. We've won three national championships, and I think we've been in 10 out of the last 15 or 16 Final Fours, something in that ballpark. So, I've had a lot of success, which means I have a lot of security within my program.

In the U.S., it's certainly about winning a lot, but it's equally about taking care of the athletes and developing them into well-rounded individuals.

We don't have the option to simply cut players and move on. It's about helping them understand life both on and off the volleyball court. We're involved with them off the court as well, which creates a different kind of dynamic.

I really dislike attention being directed towards me. My wife displayed my trophies around our house, and I was so embarrassed. I don’t even want them out; I’d prefer to put them in a closet. It's never been about me. It’s always been about the people.

I've obviously achieved three championships and had the opportunity to coach with USA Volleyball. I'm not sure if winning another championship would make me a better coach.

You asked about my defining moment. We had been working hard to develop our program, and the journey was intense. In 2008, we made it to the Final Four. The following year, in 2009, we lost 16-14 in the fifth set. We returned to the Final Four in 2010. Then, in 2011, one of my best players tore an ACL a month before the tournament, and we lost in the final eight.

After that match, I went to a back room, and my Athletic Director, my boss, followed me in.

She asked me, "What are you thinking?" and I responded, "You don't want to know what I'm thinking." After five minutes, she pressed, "I really want to know what you're thinking." I admitted, "I'm thinking about quitting. It’s such a miserable profession because you just keep going, and it feels like you can't reach the top." After that conversation, I spoke to my team, and it hit me—I had just told my boss I wanted to quit. I sought her out again and said, "Hey, I really want my job."

That moment allowed me to take a step back during the two weeks off we had and reflect on why I'm doing this.

If I'm lucky, I'll win one or two championships in my career. And that's a great career, considering how many teams are competing.

So I put my soul into people. I lost my mother in 1999 to cancer and her last words were "good people, love people." So I use that as kind of my philosophy and I've created a culture of developing people. Long story short, my passion is about developing people.

Since that moment, I've become a much better coach, my program has strengthened significantly, my staff has improved, and the development of our players has intensified. It's been a real eye-opener for me in terms of understanding the philosophy of what it takes to be a great coach.

I'm a big believer in communication, in hiring the right people that really want what's best for your athletes. And I think we've been able to do that.

VB: We're entering an important and a big subject here, the emotional development of your players. And how your role as the head coach is situated in that, when and how you lean on your staff also.

Ages 18 to 22 are often the most enjoyable years of your life, especially in the U.S. where college is a lot of fun. However, during this time, you're still figuring out who you are.

I believe we transform into a different person every seven years, gaining new perspectives as we age.

I lost my nephew to suicide about six years ago, which led me to reflect deeply about my players and their well-being. With social media and how it portrays everyone's lives as perfect, it's easy to get a skewed perception of reality.

Internally, we all have significant issues that we're dealing with and battling. Understanding that vulnerability and being able to talk about it is crucial. For instance, recognizing that today I feel like a 6 out of 10 on the happiness scale, or an 8 out of 10, and figuring out how to handle those feelings is an important part of our emotional health.

I believe you can love people and be actively involved in their lives, but a key message I convey to my team is the importance of learning to love themselves.

That's the ultimate goal, because so few people truly give themselves credit for being wonderful.

At the age I'm coaching, they often worry about every little thought and things that don't necessarily relate to their success. Helping them understand that they change every seven years and that life is challenging, but they're navigating it—this is what makes USA coaching so much fun.

Because I'm not worried about getting fired after three games. I can invest in that. We had a player last year that was just growing and growing and growing and really performed at a high level at the final four. And it took me that long, but in Europe, I may not have had a chance to develop that player with my staff.

I think what's unique about coaching in the U.S. is that if you genuinely like people and want to invest in them, you have the opportunity to impact lives at a very high and unique level.

And for me, it's changed. My role has changed as a head coach. I was a full-time trainer. I was doing it all.

Now we have David Hunt who is one of the best coaches in our country. We have Eric Sullivan, who's with the Olympic team, one of the best coaches in our country.

I've come to rely on my team a lot more because of the many external forces I'm managing to ensure our program maintains its brand and image while taking care of the athletes. You can't do everything alone, so I've had to delegate some responsibilities. Fortunately, I've hired incredible people who do an outstanding job.

VB: How do you go about the overall team management at Texas, putting team rules or core values forward?

I don't think people can remember more than three things at a time. So our core values are people, dedication and excellence. Those are the things that we try to have lessons on throughout the year. I don't have a lot of rules in my team because I think when you create rules, then you create problems.

Meaning that if my player does something, a learning mistake where I would punish her to sit her out, then it affects my whole team. And so we have to develop a culture where we're raising people.

I often say, "Good people, love people." It's a principle that has been a staple in my life, and it's something I think about constantly.

Usually my first meeting is where we'll talk about this. I actually have this little pamphlet that I could probably share with you, with some key elements on it.

Judgment is one of the biggest key words for me. It causes all kinds of conflict, whether it's race related, whether it's religion related. If people are used to reacting a certain way, they're usually acting out because they're going through something internally. Or they haven't had the ability to be taught the right formal process of how to think through something.

When I coach in my program, I take very affluent people, very low income, divorced parents, foreign kids, they've all been raised very differently.

And I have to be able to create a culture within that, how we think, how we talk and how we behave. So my initial conversations are about the behavior that we expect. These are the things that we're going to be talking about. And this is how we're going to take care of you.

Most importantly, my goal is to encourage my players to be vulnerable—to cry with me, to openly share their struggles. By accessing these emotional aspects, we create deep connections.

When you establish a stable, trusting relationship, it opens up great opportunities to coach, teach, and develop players, helping them—and myself—understand the deeper reasons behind our efforts.

I think as a coach, you want to build that trust in terms of communication, how you're dealing with them, but you also let the player know that it's okay to be bad. It's okay to have bad days. It's okay to be struggling emotionally and try to be able to help them out.

We have forms on their iPads that our players fill out every day. How are they feeling? What stress levels are they going through? How do they sleep? So that I have these key indicators. If those things come up as a six or seven, if I go approach them and have a five-minute conversation, their day has changed so much from that. You create this network where everybody cares about each other. Every athlete wants to please the coach. Every athlete wants to be great.

With this generation, you can't be a Karpol from Russia and be the angry bear and get that out of them, at least not in our American culture. Maybe in a different country, that's more acceptable.

Here, the approach has evolved. If athletes feel that people are truly in their corner, investing in them and eager to understand and support them through their processes, it opens up many opportunities to make an impact—not only on the volleyball court but also in their lives off the court.

And then ultimately when you're in that big match and you need them, there's that trust where they're not worried about "Is coach going to pull me? Is he thinking something differently?"

They know the way that I think and the way that I process, because we've had so many meetings.

VB: Going back to your athletes scoring their feelings in the morning, it’s not just about the exact number. It also offers insight into how well they can assess themselves. Someone might feel like a 8 but score themselves a 5, or the other way around. It's a valuable opportunity to understand their self-perception.

I have this theory, it's my own theory, but it's called the 4 percent theory. Only 4 percent of the people that you meet are going to be solid and going to stick in your life over a longer period of time. That's ultimate trust. Being sure you've got a cheerleader behind you. They'll drop everything and be there for you.

If you really want to coach and be a great coach and do it for the right reasons, you're doing it for the athletes. You're not doing it for your own ego.

There's obviously some coaches that do it for both. But for me, that's where, when you've asked me where I get up every single day, that's where I've kind of taken my passion. Can I make a change? Coaches can change people's lives more than anything else, more than teachers, more than parents.

You know, my own kids don't listen to half the things I say, but as a coach, I have a greater influence on them.

We also do something here that's quite different from Europe—I call my players' parents regularly. I check in with them to get a sense of things from their perspective. If they trust what I'm doing and I can explain why their child isn't playing, what they're going through, or what might be coming up, it helps build trust between us.

And then the communication between the parents and the players also builds trust. And then everybody sees that you're there for the athlete.

People don't like to have conflict, that's human nature. And as a coach, you're constantly creating conflict, playing some players, pulling players, etc.

But, you know, the benefit of aging, as I said, you change every 7 years. I've also understood there's a short-term heartache for that conversation for long-term success. And so if that is one of the things that's stopping me from being successful, my responsibility is to have the hard conversations to be able to do it and do it in a way where you can help the people out.

The insecurity of avoiding those conversations or feeling like I know everything and shouldn't listen to the parents—that's not helpful. We won't always agree 100 percent of the time, but we can have a reasonable, respectful conversation. It's important for them to see that we're looking out for their daughter's best interest.

And this is the way that we're communicating with her. And this is the way that we're going about it.

I've had parents that have come in and said, "Hey, I want to have a meeting." This was 10, 15 years ago, but the player was telling the parents completely something different than what was going on. And after the meeting, they're like, "Oh coach, you were right. This is not what I was hearing at home."

That's when I decided to implement this approach because I realized there was a breakdown in the communication chain. I'm always very clear with my players about how I've communicated with them and what we've documented. But then, the parents often hear a different message because the kids are probably afraid of having honest conversations with their parents.

VB: As a consequence of having a larger roster you'll also have players that don't start or don't even play that much. How do you keep those players engaged and motivated?

At that point, when they're not playing, we usually ask, "How can I invest in them more?" This might mean encouraging them to come up and watch more film, have more conversations, or build a deeper understanding of things. Bench players often become more isolated from the coach, so it's important to engage them more actively.

What we've tried to do is narrow that gap by bringing them in more and increasing communication with those players. This way, they can better understand the culture, grasp what we're doing, and feel more invested in the team.

And then, you know, ultimately at the end of the day, each person's responsible for their own outcome, right?

They got to put more investment in it. And if they do that, they usually see a greater return and they develop at a higher level.

VB: Being in Texas provides a great environment for sports, especially for those who excel. However, players who get less playing time are also less exposed to that exposure(NIL, ...). Which creates a disparity. How do you help players cope with this difference in exposure and recognition, and teach them that both situations offer valuable lessons?

Yeah, I think it's important to have all those conversations. I'm a big believer that failure is valuable because going through those trials helps reshape how you think.

But there's a lot of work involved. Many people assume NIL is just something these kids receive, but they have to put in a lot of effort. They need to build their social media following, create a personal brand, and do much more. In fact, we're about to release something really unique in the next two or three weeks that highlights this effort.

We're going to start creating branding opportunities around our players and will continue expanding this with more and more players. Right now, we're just focusing on three, but we've had some players who have been very successful in this area, even though they haven't been starters. These players have been proactive in pursuing these opportunities and understanding the importance of building their brand.

But I also tell them that if I bring in players from five years ago who had no idea about these opportunities, they'd be so jealous because they didn't make a penny from this.

Plus, our success as a program, thanks to our great players, is bringing more attention and creating more opportunities for everyone. So, all the players are benefiting to some degree, depending on their efforts. This includes things like running their own camps and determining what they can charge, and finding ways to involve young kids.

It's such a unique business model compared to what you see in Europe.

VB: True, a hypothetical All-American from 2020 who maybe went on to play for Team USA didn't have both the NIL opportunity or the choice. Your athletes have the chance to build something out.

Here's what I've done with it. We've created this thing called "She Is Me." There's an old Michael Jordan commercial for Gatorade that says "Sometimes I dream that he is me."

When we came out of a game after COVID, all the kids were screaming at our players and I was like, gosh, there's this impact that our players have. How do we give back? So we started talking about being able to do that.

My wife and I started going out with the most successful women in Austin, Texas that are very, very successful in all that they do and we would bring them to our practices to meet our team. They fell in love with our players. Like, "Oh my gosh, these women are amazing."

So we took them out and said, "Hey, what would it have been like for you to have a mentor at age 18 and 19 years old?" And they're like, "Oh, it would have changed our life." And so we've created this program where we're matching up every one of our players in anything that they want to do. So Maddie Skinner wants to start a skincare line. We're going to start a skincare line with these super successful women. So all of my players have an opportunity to go invest in some kind of business opportunity.

I want my players to be great partners or great wives with whoever they're with. And if you get in the real world, you know, to be successful here in the U.S. you've got to work 68 hours a week.

It's tough to juggle being a mom and a partner while trying to build a career. That's why creating an online business or something that lets you work from anywhere can be so appealing.

We all have these unique challenges, and our athletes often don't understand much about business yet because they haven't experienced it. But it's about opening their eyes to new possibilities—not necessarily guaranteeing success, but exposing them to something they had no idea about before.

And it's a fear factor, like, "Oh wait, I can do this in a couple of years." And so I think my goal is that if I can create long-term success for these athletes, that's what the real reward is.

VB: The future of volleyball, from a technical point of view, how will the game evolve according to your opinion? Or what are you hoping for that the game will look like in a couple of decades? What is needed to get there?

In the U.S., I would love to get to what they're doing internationally. Going to the Olympics and seeing the clock they have before they serve, or the speed and the quality of the replay system - we went to the Serbia game that was five games and it was two hours and three minutes. It was so action-packed in terms of what they were doing.

I think technology has really taken our game to a point where it's entertaining to watch on television. We figured out this kind of two-hour window where it's just always going.

And I think VolleyWorld is doing an excellent job with the graphics and bringing in the fans to be able to grow this.

Now the question is how do we make this bigger and better and grow the game in our country. Because I believe obviously that volleyball is the greatest female sport.

From the technical side, I think there's so much creativity and you've got to really think outside of the box. You've got to be willing to do that. But you have to have windows where you can actually experiment. In your season in the prime is not the time to be doing that.

I think David and Eric do a great job of being creative and creating opportunities by bringing in what they observe in a lot of international matches. They try to pick up and implement techniques they see.

This game is not just about what you learn; it's also about what you can take from watching others and figuring out how to apply it yourself.

Last year we were spending a lot of time seeing if we could tool with two hands. The jam, which we call it over here, has really developed in our country. We've seen high success rates on that.

I think we're trying to evolve more like a men's offense because we have the physical players that can be able to do that. The back row attacking, how to be able to match up and overload people and try to utilize those key systems to win that 4 percent difference, right?

Kill percentage, lower the error percentage, how to get teams more out of system and do that. I don't think there's any magic to it. I don't think there's just this one thing, but I think there's this creativity where you've got to be watching a lot of films and investing in how the game is played and seeing if you can develop that in your players.

VB: How should we manage the rules of our game? Let's talk about the direction our sport should take in general?

I think in terms of the rules, I'm always thinking about how to get the whistle out of the referee's mouth. Because they have such a big impact to the game. In this country, we're going to no double contacts on the second ball.

I remember when we changed from a white ball to a colored ball and all the coaches were complaining about it. Why would we go to a colored ball? And the colored ball is so great now because it's easier to watch on TV. There are all these benefits. But as people, we get stuck in our ways.

The 'no double contact' - the set doesn't get better when you double contact it - at least in our country, is going to be a big one. That's the big, fascinating one to me to see how that plays out for us.

I think we still don't do a good enough job of having a worldwide community in the sport of volleyball. We don't share enough in terms of when games are on TV. To all my top recruits I talk about VolleyballWorld or the different kind of podcasts to watch. They don't even know what VolleyballWorld is.

The disadvantage we have in this country is our athletes don't get to watch any international volleyball. The highest level they get to watch is us, and then it's the international at the Olympics.

I'm hoping these new pro leagues can really take off and we can build this and make this a financial success. When you invest in the sport of volleyball, it's there. You saw when Poland sold out the arena in three minutes. It's part of the culture, it's part of the great game and there are so many eyes that still have not seen the sport of volleyball in this country.

I think the rule part of it for me is the whistle. You watch some of the international matches, even some right when we opened up and people are jamming it and the first referee calls the first four balls and they were clean. And then you watch the men's match and no one's calling it. So like, what is the rule?

You should never have a situation where you enter a match and there's these polar opposites of how a referee is going to behave in the game. They should be standing there making the really important calls if it's drastic, as opposed to interfering with the games and the results.

VB: Before bigger tournaments, mostly it's the Olympics, rules don't get changed, but they get tweaked a bit. But then it comes very subjective and this is what happened now. Are we jamming and throwing or aren't we doing it?

I think that's fun to watch, though. I think it's creativity, and I think anytime there's creativity, there's excitement with the game. I like that that is what they're doing in the FIVB. They're trying different things.

They're not staying stagnant to what's going on. I think the game continues to evolve with a lot of great minds.

VB: It's about bringing the game more on top of the net without making it become more dangerous. Letting attackers develop their shots and being creative.

There's that out of system where you're trying to set basically almost 50-50, maybe 90 again, but also like when the setter gets pulled off the net, you know, that's now come inside a little bit more.

So the game continues to evolve where you can have advantages even if you're out of system.

And again, the out of system game is what it's all about.

VB: How do you go about structuring your defensive and your offensive coordination. What is the role of David and Eric there?

That's a great question. Pete Carroll is one of the most famous American football coaches. I coached his daughter and I would always watch the American football coaches practice because it's very fascinating watching a different sport train. I would invest in that.

American football has 120 guys on the field and they're always changing, but the organizational structure was fascinating to me.

When I was able to hire the right coaches, I implemented what they do in American football. You have an offensive coordinator and a defensive coordinator.

David is our offensive coordinator, and Eric is our defensive coordinator.

Now we have two people who are clearly committed to specializing in their areas. Of course, we do have some crossover in our meetings where we discuss different things, but during the games or matches, they can focus solely on their specific responsibilities.

I'm overseeing it all or talking to them during that. I'm doing a little bit more of the serving and looking at those things.

We try to manage this by giving a lot of responsibility to my coaches. I don't need to be the one at the forefront or the one always talking to the players.

For me, it's about being clear, providing great messaging, and being elite at what we do. And I believe I have the two best coaches in the country.

VB: Your staff who's watching international volleyball is a major key, there's so much to learn. For example, the uptempo, inside-the-antenna play style of Minas under Nicola Negro, which we covered last month, is one of those great examples to study. Even out of system they are investing in keeping the speed in their game and keeping it inside.

And we're looking at all those numbers where you never want to set a ball wide. The more that we study it, the better it is inside because it's hard to set up your block.

The American system's a little bit different, we have a Madison Skinner who's touching close to 11 feet. Because the setting is still less experienced here, sometimes we're not so committed just to speed, speed, speed. Quality of swing over a period of time and hitting seams is where it's at.

So we're looking at those numbers and at the same time at the qualities that we have. But we're studying the short string versus long string overloads, more use of attacking the middle of the court, managing all that stuff.

David would be really fun for you to have on and do a film session with on our team. You should probably get him on. He thinks the game differently.

VB: Best game you've ever seen. What recent or game from the volleyball vaults did validate once more that volleyball is the greatest sport on the globe (for all of us).

Yeah, I mean, my favorite game that we lost was in the championship against Penn State. It was a very long game, spectacular digs, lots of momentum changes. It was just a special game in terms of the specific role I had in it.

My favorite game so far of the Olympics was Slovenia versus France men's game. I just thought it was a really clean game and very creative. And I thought the setting was phenomenal in that game.

I haven't picked a favorite yet in terms of the Olympic games on the women's side. I'm just super impressed the way Italy's playing right now.

I think their blocking and the way they're getting soft touches and transitioning is just at a really high level right now.

I have them as the favorite.

VB: If you can make the strongest 'starting six' in the world, right now. What would your team look like?

I don't know all the international players. I'm watching, but I'm not great with names. I think again with the way the game is evolving, there are some key components.

The men's game setting-wise is further along than the women's game. I think they're more creative. I think they can set from further off the net. They can set from different body positions. I think that's where the women's game can really advance in time.

The women get more and more physical, obviously, my first player would probably be Paola Egonu just because of the capabilities of someone that can take over a match at a high level. And then I would probably go with trying to find the best libero and try to make sure that there's some glue there to develop a really good team.

That's why Italy is so successful right now. Their pieces are good, without being superstars. But their blocking is elite right now, their middle blockers are getting a lot of touches and they are able to change games like that.

Again, I'm not so diverse in the international game where I can answer that question of who to choose. But I would definitely want to make sure that my superpower is obviously the first contact and having a good setter.

But you've got to be able to have some people out of the backcourt that can really dominate.

VB: If you could have a gigantic billboard anywhere with anything on it — metaphorically speaking, getting a message out to every athlete on the globe — what would it say and why?

I think one of the things that I've always noticed between the men's game and the women's game is that if you throw a guy in the gym with a couple of balls that they'll find different games that they can play and find ways to be creative.

The women's side is a bit further behind in that regard. I think women often feel a strong sense of accountability, knowing that all eyes are on them. They need to feel a bit freer, to be more experimental with the game, and be open to trying new things in practice, even if it means making some mistakes.

I always tell my players, "You're not going to play your best volleyball until you're 28 to 30 years old." That's how long it takes. But those who can be creative are the ones who really excel. To me, the greatest players in the world think like a goldfish—they have a very short memory and quickly move on to the next play. I've noticed that my best players have that mentality, which helps them avoid feeling overwhelmed by pressure.

But I need to think of that question. It's a really good question because I have a really big TV in my room where I could put this quote on.

VB: How has a failure, or apparent failure, set you up for later success? Do you have a “favorite failure” of yours?

I think it goes back to my story from 2011, which gave me a lot of time to reflect on my purpose. Early on as a coach, you're often trying to prove yourself, establish your value, and work your way up the ranks. You want to ensure you can be successful, and obviously, the only way to do that is by winning.

But that experience really gave me some perspective that changed not only how I manage my stress levels, but also how I developed my team's culture.

I think it made me a much better coach because I started prioritizing people and experiences over just trying to win every single time.

Now, that doesn't mean I'm not giving my all every single time. My heart is always set on winning, but I also need to find value in the quality of the season, even if it isn't a championship season. And that's hard to do.

In the last five years, what new belief, behaviour, or habit has most improved your life?

Again, I think I mentioned earlier about finding my balance, especially when it comes to taking more time for myself. I don't often give myself the time to think about me, and that's been a big challenge for me.

Thank you, Jerritt

Extra:

A lot of top ranked college teams are coming out with behind the scenes documentaries. The one featured below is one of those, and is interesting to check out. 👍



