===== SESSION: https://volleybrains.com/fabio-soli-part1/ =====

----- VIDEOS -----
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=D1QvhvByG-0
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EZDhVnKsSAo
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VEZEYNYV-qc
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KMaSOg10SXQ
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9nVwqXJb0Vw
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BtxZpk4PYmk
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=19CvVMSFvV8
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dKXESZwjnVM
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sVfhIi2VWn0
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Q0JxS7k3W_0
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CztUHbWfd8o
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tJSP0xyNgX8

----- TEXTO -----
84. Fabio Soli: Embracing Player Creativity (Part 1)

Fabio Soli is the head coach of Trentino Volley, one of Italy's and Europe's top pro volleyball teams.

In May 2024, Trentino Volley, under the masterful guidance of coach Fabio Soli, clinched the European Champions League title with a commanding 3-0 victory over Polish powerhouse Jastrzębski.

This triumph in Europe's premier club competition, where the world's elite teams clash, marks a pinnacle in Soli's coaching journey.

Since embarking on his coaching career in 2011, Fabio has steadily ascended the ranks to now helm one of the world's top professional volleyball clubs.

Our conversation with Fabio delves into the core of his coaching philosophy, exploring:

• The crucial role of decisive coaching, even when facing potential missteps
• How the fear of errors stunts player growth in volleyball
• Striking a balance between tactical structure and player autonomy
• The enriching impact of diverse mentorship in coaching
• Nurturing players' game intelligence and on-court decision-making
• Fostering a team culture that harmonizes individual and collective growth
• Pursuing relentless improvement for both coach and team

We have 41 minutes of transcribed and subtitled interview with coach Soli in this article. Enjoy!

Enter Fabio...

Fabio, why did you commit to being a professional volleyball coach? What pushed you towards that decision?

My story is a fairly straightforward one. I was a mediocre player, which I think is very helpful to a coach. It allows you to accept that it's okay to start from the bottom, and that's where I started from.

I took my first coaching certifications in Italy because I had the opportunity and just took the courses, almost unknowingly. Then I spent two years as a pro player in Milan. I was very young and got homesick, so I came home and started playing in fairly low categories.

I hadn't enrolled in college, having only finished high school, so I was working. I was playing and working, playing and working. This gave me, in my opinion, a great opportunity to understand what things I loved to do in life.

I realized early on that by playing and working, I wouldn't be able to push either my sports or my professional career forward. At some point, I was faced with a choice: doing my passion, which was volleyball, poorly, and failing to achieve something important in a working environment.

That was putting me in a state of mediocrity that I couldn't stand.

So I asked myself: What is the thing I like to do? This is a great lesson that, even as a coach, I find myself trying to pass on to my players. What do I really like to do? What is my path? If I have to throw away the opportunity in volleyball or in working, what do I throw away? I decided to throw the work away.

So I quit my job, enrolled in the university, and studied Sports Science because I knew my life was in sports. At that point, it wasn't clear to me that I was going to be a volleyball coach. I just knew my life was in sports, my world was sports. I've always liked to try different sports than volleyball as well. Even in enduring physical fatigue, I found great pleasure.

I basically oriented my life toward sports. I graduated with a master's degree after five years. That's when I started looking for opportunities in soccer and other places where I could find a chance to squeeze in.

This moment in my life coincided with an opportunity to help out Modena. They had Silvano Prandi as their coach, and Modena needed an extra assistant coach.

Silvano had Camillo Placi as his second coach. Between the two of them, they were missing somebody younger in the gym. They were very skillful in everything that was game preparation, but they needed a helping hand in the gym.

I was young and still playing when they made me this proposal, and I took advantage of it. I no longer had the physical freshness to continue my commitment to play, so I quit playing and started a coaching career in my favorite sport: volleyball.

The choice to focus on sports was not a choice to focus directly on volleyball initially, but from there, I had the great fortune of working with Modena and Silvano.

After that, I ended up in Turkey with Daniele Bagnoli. When they exonerated Daniele, I became the head coach for half the season. The next year, Daniel Castellani came, and I stayed there with him. I was fortunate enough to be in the game and watch great masters. This gave me so much from a curriculum perspective - all that knowledge and experience from three completely different people.

This is a piece of advice to those who ask me what they should do:

If you can, learn from capable people, but choose mentors who are different from one another.

This way, you'll see different approaches and different worlds with different eyes.

Then the desire grew to start as a head coach. I had been an assistant for several years for all these very capable people. And I said to myself, "I want to try it." Just like when I chose to quit my job, I put everything on the scale and asked, "What do I want to do? Do I want to be a head coach?"

I didn't look at the economic conditions or at being away from home. I launched myself into following my pure instinct. When you work in a field that you are passionate about, instinct is a little voice that should always be listened to.

I listened to it and did two years in A2, then went to Ravenna, then Monza, then Cisterna. After being exonerated from Cisterna, I rebooted again. And now I'm at Trento.

What you said about decision-making is very important. Having the ability to decide. Being able to make your own decisions. Because you don't see things as they really are.

It is complicated.

I consider myself a fairly pragmatic person. I like to live by emotions, however, I think I have a fine critical capacity. Choosing between things on either side of the scale between the things that are worthwhile and things that are not worthwhile, it's something I can do quite well.

One thing I'm learning still however is the actual ability to choose. Choosing even at the risk of not getting the result.

That is a skill that I am still slowly developing and acquiring. To be able to not only make the accumulation of positive things, the accumulation of the negative things and say okay, then let's go toward that direction. Since what I have chosen, what I have examined takes me that way. That I can do.

That special ability to actually choose, to say okay, given these things here, let's go that way, it's something that in my opinion is learned through experience. Much more than just by talent. The ability to actually choose in my opinion is something that is acquired. The talent of sniffing out what things are, so evaluating what are the positive or negative things, in my opinion, are more of a talent.

The actual ability to choose is something I think is so fundamental.

Not only for those who are coaching. Also for the players who train in the gym. Or for the work that you do. Even if it means that you'll fail. But that capacity is most important. Much more than the result you'll get. Which can be negative or positive.

And it may not even depend on you.

What advice would you give yourself as a starting coach? An advice that is so clear and logic for you now, but that you had to develop over the years.

Make your own choices. Make your choice and make mistakes. Learn from your mistakes. But make your choice with great serenity, because our role requires that.

'Not making decisions' has a high cost, not only for ourselves but also for the group we're leading. The inability to choose, standing still without making a decision is not the way to go.

Not making a decision is exactly the same as always making the wrong choice.

In a guidance role towards players who are much younger - I'm not, however, there's starting to be a generational gap of 15, 20 years between me and the guys I coach - it puts them in a position of not recognizing themselves in you anymore.

Therefore, they go and look elsewhere to find another reference point.

Trentino winning the Champions League

So the most important advice I'd give myself is to make the choice. Choose. Make a mistake. Be okay with it. Know that there are always a wide range of possibilities, counter-analyses, and other choices to counterbalance perhaps a less-than-perfect choice you've made before.

Also, always put a question mark behind your ideas. This isn't the same as being insecure, but it's about your willingness to change.

The ability to choose and get started, even at the cost of being wrong, is a very important thing for those in this profession.

What are bad recommendations you still hear about coaching or training volleyball? Things that you don't understand are still out there.

There are two things that I think are a direct consequence of each other. One thing that I believe originated a long time ago that we continue to carry along, despite everyone spending so many words and effort to hide this type of culture.

It's what I call: The demonization of error.

From when kids enter the gym to when they stop playing the game, we tell them to make fewer mistakes, you're making too many mistakes, etc. At the same time, we ask them to get out of their comfort zone and find new ways to do things.

Those are two roads, one goes east and one goes west. They are two paths that not only never meet, they go in very different directions.

We spend so much effort to get new players, old players, young people to step out of their comfort zone. They trust us to try and step out of what they know to do well, which sometimes is a lot by the way.

When you're like me, dealing with the most incredible talent the volleyball courts have ever seen, they can easily tell you, "I'm fine like this, I'm a high-level player, what I can do is more than enough. What else do you want from me?"

So you already spend a lot of energy to make them take that step. And as soon as they make a mistake, you tell them to control their mistakes.

This starts when they are small. Youth coaches are convinced they win games because they make few mistakes than the opponent. Then we complain because these players are too structured inside their area of comfort and they never evolve. And we even dare to get pissed off because of this.

Even worse, then us coaches start to talk about players having lack of trust in us. We start to think that players don't take our advice and guidance because we think they lack trust towards us.

At the same time, we instructed them from the time they were kids to being a pro player to make fewer mistakes. These are the things that are terrible in our sport. Not only in our sport, however, but I just talk about volleyball.

Their is an inconsistency between the demonization of error and the call to step out of the comfort zone, to always push the envelope.

You were saying before, being better with each passing day, right? Every day you go to the gym, how can you be better if you don't try new things? If you don't make a mistake in trying something new?

This is the most important thing and in my opinion, a consequence of this also lies in the excessive framing of players. Which is something I hate and fight even in the face of seeing my team make more mistakes than it normally does.

This craze that I see in high-level volleyball, but somewhat at all levels to frame players within a pattern where the coach claims to be able to organize it all. When our sport is actually made up of infinite variability.

So if you don't propose to and train the player to also be free to try and invent something, you end up inside a 'swamp of a never-changing game' when actually the game is ever evolving.

And here we arrive to a question that I know you'll ask me later on. The game evolves. But not thanks to the coaches. The game evolves because of the inventions of the players. It is the players who invent things and we coaches who see them, we sense them, structure them, train them, stimulate them. But volleyball changes on players' ideas, on players' instincts.

And if I cancel this instinct, putting the players on fixed tracks, on tracks they need to follow, and they can never leave... if I do that I am doing something that maybe brings me results in the short term, but which kills the free expression of the player.

It kills the talent and inventiveness and genius of the player.

And at a very high level, just like in the youth, if I do this, I believe, I personally believe, that I'm not allowing the player to express himself to his full potential.

I like to organize things. I give my ideas to my team. And then of course I also look at what my players do.

Because my ideas can be the best in the world, but they can also not be perfectly suited to my group.

And when I have players in my group who can read situations, (don't forget that the players are on the court, I'm not on the court) to read situations in a different way than what is my model, I'll even go to the extent to build my model of play, on that interpretation that the player shows me that he has.

I give the task to my player who has that ability to organize, arrange and be a leader within the team of that particular situation. Of that particular fundamental to organize that phase of the game. I really like to confront myself with the most responsible players I have inside the court about many different things.

I'm always very, very careful to maybe not give negative feedback when they commit an error, maybe the error had a great idea behind it.

If the player proves to me that behind what he did, he did that action because he saw something that happened and therefore he interpreted it that way and came to this action.

That is a confrontation that I love and in my opinion in the long run, produces much more individual and team growth than to pigeonhole my players into "here we do this, here we do that, here we do this."

Because you can only coach like that for just a small portion of the game. For the unforeseen things you need to have players who can read, feels the situation, who can see it. If you continuously put them inside of a cage, they loose their ability to read.

Can you give us some examples where you've adapted your own gameplay concepts after you've seen players react a certain way?

Ngapeth, on defense. Once he is on the diagonal, on the same player, same situation, next time he goes to the line position. And he defends both the diagonal and the parallel. And you say, "Sorry, I told you to stand diagonally. Why did you go to the line?"

That's probably where I think we coaches can learn, going to ask and interview these players to understand what they read, what they look at, what they see. We as coaches will also improve in our ability to give them guidance, advice, when we develop in them a certain reading ability of the game.

It would also allow us to be much less present within the organization of the game.

To train the ability in a player to read, to promote the independence in a player to choose, to look, to understand.

In my opinion, it is the best way, not just a way, it is the best way also to train themselves to grow technically as players.

Because having the ability to watch the opponent gives you the ability of seeing how something is done and it brings these skills into your own toolkit as well.

Instead, us coaches tend to do the opposite, to tend to robotize our players and develop them in being less skilled than what they could be instead.

This clearly happens in the block defense phase. But what even comes to my mind from the teams where I have been: The second touch, who sets it? That is if the setter takes the first touch. Does the libero set it? Do the hitters set it? Do we attack directly?

Going outside of your simple patterns leads you to make many mistakes, but it also brings you, in my opinion, to enrich a toolkit that then makes the player curious. "Ah, I can do something different." And if I can do it here, then I can do it there also.

If I can do it in one thing where I have fun, then I as a coach can use that excuse there, even to get him to do something he likes a little less. Because you showed the player he can evolve and grow here, so now he can grow there as well.

It is a real opportunity, that of variability. I call it variability. The 'doing something different' which also finds me often to confront me with my players.

Okay, in this situation here, I as the coach, I ask you being the player: What can you do differently? Okay, here we could not bring home the result. Okay, what can we do differently? Should I suggest it to you? Go ahead, try to tell me what you think. This in my opinion is a good way to train your players.

This very often is confused with a certain loss of leadership. Not being the one who finds the solution to a problem. But I am convinced of this thing that, if one of my players becomes capable of reading and inventing the right solution, I as the coach will certainly also win more.

Because I have a player on the court who solves a problem for me before the problem is created. Because he reads it, recognizes it. And invents a solution.

Instead of me, the coach, who has to chase a problem that first occurs. And then I have to fix it. This is a great thing to try and create.

Always with as a prerequisite the talk about the demonization of errors I was giving you earlier.

Maybe you have players who don't even allow themselves to try something different? Because if I go and try to solve something that I have never tried to solve before, very often I fall back into making mistakes. And if I as the coach demonize the error... You see it in serving, you see it on defense, when they block, in the extreme case of leaving a spiker without a block because your position 4 gives a too aggressive assist.

This is a huge disgrace. I see it in second-touch sets when the first touch drops far away from the net. There I ask players to even throw the ball to the other side rather than give it off the net. To generate a third-touch free ball will find the opposing team ready to strike. If we generate a second-touch free ball, a far away second touch set and the ball goes directly over the net, that's better right.

Once it'll hit the opposing setter, so they have to play high ball. Another time a middle needs to take it, which looks ludicrous at times.

So my players need to understand that we can take that risk. But in reality it is not even a risk.

It's a way of exploring and overcoming that demonization of the error. Which in my opinion is one of the biggest diseases of our game. And it's created by us. The coaches.

Matias: Also the fact of opening up as a coach. You also ask input from your player: Before asking me, what would you have done? Then, if he is able to give a decent answer. Now it's your turn. Now it's your turn to value what your player told you. This opportunity is also very interesting. Because if you ask for input, you get it and you reply with: "No, nice try, but you're completely wrong." Next time they won't come to you anymore. So you also have to be great at giving their feedback the right amount of value.

Yes, the input of the question of what we have to do and the sharing of the solution, all of that must happen at the right time and the right place.

There are times when players are also really in need of guidance. When we really need to be there for them. But also times when we can ask them to pick up their responsibility and come up with the solution.

Maybe because it's a time moment in a game where all is looking good. Even though maybe the score is an important score, however we are all serene and so there is this possibility of confrontation and of finding a solution together.

In other moments they need to be able to lean on us. Because they have enough thoughts in their heads that going to look for a solution in those moments is maybe a bit complicated.

Matias: No, of course, my thing was more after the game on Monday or Tuesday. Yours is more, the Champions League finals, in the tiebreaker asking them: "Hey, what would you do here?" Probably that's not the right time.

This ties in with player growth and talent development, always a hot topic. Youth coaches are specializing their players so early, missing out on developing truly exceptional players. Missing out because they are blinded by something ordinary like an early growth spurt or...

Talent will show up. What many coaches forget is that talent will activate itself. It may come a year later, or even a year and a half later, but talent will get there. If you show them the right way, the talent will emerge.

Where talent might not prevail is in situations where, at a young age, players are being labeled as 'untalented'.

But how many players are there, especially in a complicated sport like volleyball, who blossom even at 23, 24, or 26 years old? And before that age, maybe no one was watching them? There are many examples of that.

The example of the United States is very significant. They train a bit, but not so much. They go to college and so on. They continue to play. And at 22, 23, 24 years old, you start to see them rise up. And now you get well-structured and capable players. Why?

Because they had the opportunity to grow and truly develop themselves. And they also entered a more mature stage in their life.

Our sport isn't easy. It's very complicated from a motoric point of view. Let's have the patience to wait even on those who are not the biggest phenoms. That's something we should develop much more and much better.

Do you have a particular goal? Maybe a goal that you already reached or a goal that is so hard to reach that it gives you daily motivation?

My approach is very simple. When I started coaching, I said, I would like to achieve more as a coach than what I did as a player. My good fortune was that as a player I was very, very average, and therefore it wasn't difficult to achieve this first goal.

The dream is that of the 'Maglia Azzurra', to coach the Italian National Team. I'm not sure if that's a goal, but it's definitely a dream.

I never reached that level when I was a junior player. I was able to stay on the staff of the Women's National Team as an assistant. The Italian national team is my national team, so that remains a dream.

One thing I like in the day-to-day, year by year, is to create a challenge for myself that has the team I coach as a foundation. Trying to see each group that I coach each year as a new challenge, as a new group.

As if I get a pair of new eyes to also see new things, to try to develop new ideas. What you were saying before about daily improvement - for me, it is a goal. Now, for example, that I will coach Trento again this year, which is a very similar team to last year's, the main goal I set for myself is:

How can I improve this team that is practically identical to last year's? Where can I go to improve this team? What is this year's challenge?

As this year's team is virtually identical to that of the previous year.

In years past, when I had been coaching teams of medium or medium-low level in Superlega, I used to get basically a completely new team. And so there the challenge was easy: a new team. Trying to understand how to frame the team, where to go to push, where to try to hide the unsolvable issues also.

(Matias here: I wanted to give an extra call-out to the 'where to try to hide the unsolvable issues' phrasing. Ok, carry on. :-))

So to search every year, in each group, for a new challenge. One that has improvement as a goal. So where does this year's team start? What more can I give them with last year's experience in mind? Where can we go to turn our gaze to improve further?

In building out your team for this season. What is a big focus for yourself? What is the core about your current team culture?

There are two aspects that I want to highlight in our team culture. There's this bouncing back and forth between the 'I' and the 'us'.

The key thing is to develop that 'us' on which you then create your type of play. Because 'I' alone doesn't go anywhere. You and I alone are not going anywhere; we have to create a solid force. We have to create a unique element where each one of us... I like to say 'each of us' is very important.

So there's a balance that I was telling you about earlier, right? This team component of the 'us', where the 'I' is very important. So there are team goals and individual goals. And it is important that those individual goals are part of the player's awareness, that it is not just an individual good. But that individual goal also has a link to the team.

If the team needs to improve a certain thing, this particular thing very unlikely will be everyone's own goal. It will be a feature that someone can go and improve to a higher level with a higher focus than others. And maybe these others will have to have a higher focus on other things that maybe those who had to spend elsewhere can do a little less. Some in blocking, some more in defense...

This is something that I try to bounce around a lot. Everything happens in between the 'us' and the 'I'.

Individual interviews and team goals. Ideas coming from me, ideas that come from them.

All of that ends up inside a bowl of soup that tastes good only if all this is balanced. Otherwise, it has a bad taste. If there is too much 'I', if there is too much coach, the soup sucks. If there is too much player, the soup sucks. On the other hand, if you can balance well all this coming and going, 'I', 'us', individuality, and collective, you'll get to the magic of playing a great game of volleyball.

Because in the end, playing great volleyball is not a unique recipe, is it? Each team has its own recipe. Every team, with a different coach, is ever-changing. Because it is part of that 'us' which is composed of that whole series of 'I's. I always say, a complete 'us' originates from a well-developed 'I'.

When I or other individuals in the team are not strong, not well developed, the 'us' will always have a weak side. It will always have a weakness. And the more this 'I' is lost, the more you lose the player. This player stands aside, etc., well the more this 'us' will weaken.

It's always bouncing around between the team and the individual, the team and the individual, individual interviews, and the team, team goals, individual goals.

It is not always needed to be perfect, but it is very important that the team perceives the real presence of every single one of its players.

Last season to one of my players I actually said these exact words. I told him, look, it's not important that you are not playing at your top level. But it's important that your companions sense your presence. You just need to be there. Even if you are there at 50%, or at 70%. But be heard, try, do something. Maybe it won't work out, but that's a minor problem.

This is very important. The fact that there is this awareness of the 'I', that must be important, must be developed, must be of a high standard, but it's part of an 'us'. That 'us' solves the problems when the individual 'I' gets into trouble.

I'll ruin your perfect monologue with an anecdote. But there is a connection here. :-) It's about a clip I saw of an Italian basketball coach who coaches in Lithuania. He was talking to one of his players during practice, telling him that shooters need to shoot. "If you miss, it's on me. I'm the coach, I make the roster. If I don't put you in, that's fine. But if I put you in, it's because I believe that you are a shooter and you have to shoot."

Yes, it relates to what we're discussing. We must never lose sight of the team's way nor the individual path.

Because it is only this balance that creates the magic called 'a team'.

There's also the assumption of responsibility. The last ball of the Champions League, who will I give it to? I'll give it to Michieletto. And he has to know that that ball will go to him. Everyone knows it.

And if he doesn't put the ball down, it's just an 'outcome problem', not a personal problem. It's not related to anything else. It just gives or doesn't give us the desired result. That's what's important.

When Trinchieri says, "I put you in because you are a shooter and I expect you to shoot," he's not putting stress on the 'I', but empowering it. He's giving the 'I' the thumbs up to act as the spearhead of the 'us', which is 'the team'.

The more all of this is experienced with a sense of normality, of lightness, the more it works. The more it's experienced with distress, with weight, the less it works.

And the more the "I" is lost, the more the "us" declines.

This is the game, in my opinion. But this isn't only about sports. Sports has the advantage that it goes so fast and is repetitive that every day new chances arrive.

Matias: These opportunities to reset arrive every midweek and weekend. 'Any given Sunday' you get the chance to show up or not show up.

In life and work, it's a bit slower, but it's always there. The more you grow in level in your working environment, the more these things become similar to sports. Because these things start to be part of your day. Every department has their needs and needs to be managed - marketing, production, suppliers...

The more responsibility someone has, the more frequently you experience these things. I think the balance between the 'I' and the 'us' is the secret. Living and experiencing it as if it's a logical and normal thing to do.

The more normal it feels the less heavy the perceived results you'll achieve will feel.

Thank you, Fabio.

Extra:

The clip we talked about of Italian basketball coach Andrea Trinchieri

This is an excerpt out of the following documentary;

https://youtu.be/tJSP0xyNgX8?si=RaEd0wbnhz8BFPZL&t=1025



