===== SESSION: https://volleybrains.com/russ-rose-part2/ =====

----- VIDEOS -----
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=K7OBrtvpjL4
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_nX9EmUv_QU
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5tu-eWqgUS4
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uqCof2WOTbE
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Z8OS7p94yaI
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xwJ8tFUwaMs
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KWYEEZefEvM
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sYMHSGQE3pI
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lwoWhDJtJLM
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JeCbnEIDWmg
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Zx42DTyBcfk
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9oTk0F9JK4Y
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Z2tPLqDZIHQ
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5qPN7xD0qM4

----- TEXTO -----
86. Russ Rose: Everything Matters

In an era where volleyball continues to evolve rapidly, few voices carry the weight of experience and wisdom quite like Coach Russ Rose.

After an unprecedented 47-year tenure at Penn State, culminating in seven national championships, Rose's insights into the sport of volleyball remain as sharp and relevant as ever.

The recent BTN documentary "The Streak" showcases one of the most remarkable achievements in collegiate sports history - Penn State's 109-match winning streak and four consecutive NCAA championships. Yet, as Rose reveals in this comprehensive video interview, the championship teams weren't necessarily his best teams - but they were the ones that found ways to win when it mattered most.

In this interview Coach Rose offers invaluable perspectives on:

Why watching international volleyball is interesting for coaching development

How to build championship teams beyond just gathering talented players

The importance of detailed statistical analysis beyond conventional metrics

Adapting to modern challenges in the NIL era

Managing the transition between college and professional volleyball

Creating competitive training environments that drive excellence

Understanding the evolving patterns in international volleyball

Developing players who can succeed at the next level

The changes USA Volleyball is undergoing

and so much more...

With his characteristic attention to detail and straightforward approach, coach Rose shares insights gained from decades of experience at the highest level of collegiate volleyball, his attention to international competitions, and his ongoing analysis of the sport's evolution.

Enter Russ...

How important is it for coaches to keep learning and growing to move from one level to the next? Is being aware of the best volleyball played worldwide essential to that growth?

Do coaches want to continue to learn and grow? If they're interested in that - which I think is the only way to be successful when moving from one level to the next - they need to be aware of the best volleyball being played in the world.

I've always been an avid viewer of international volleyball.

Whether I was traveling with the U.S. men's team or women's team, I would always say, "Hey, I'm going to stay in the gym and watch practice." We would go to the tournament in Montreux, and after our practice, Japan would come in next. I happened to know one of their assistants because he used to be at Lock Haven.

I'd say, "Hey, I'm not scouting - I'm just a volleyball geek who wants to watch you guys train." Not to write it up or do an article or book - that's not my thing.

What I wanted to see was how teams evolved. In '64, Japan was the best team in the world. What are they doing 40 years later to try and remain relevant as the sport continues to grow?

For coaches, let's say you're one of the 350 Division One college coaches, and your program isn't well-funded, but you're happy to have a job. Is there great value in watching all the VNL matches or Olympic matches, men and women, like I do? Probably not. But if you're in the next 100 programs, does it serve a purpose? Yes.

And in the next 100 those schools probably have one or two players who could benefit from watching the elite level.

What I always picked up was seeing something special - like watching Sergio when he was playing, and being able to tell one of my players, "Hey, let's watch video of this guy because he's the best libero in the world today." Or with players like Giba or Andre Heller from that era. Your athlete can't mimic these moves probably, but you can show it to them, this is what they do, and you could pick this or that up from that.

It was always limited with USA Volleyball in this country - not a lot of video on TV. You can get more now as the internet gets more advanced. Unfortunately, I'm just not very good with the computer. To me, the good thing for the day was just being able to connect with you. 😄

What drives you to approach coaching with such attention to detail and a unique perspective on stats and practice?

I have 43 years of books in my office - stats and practices written out longhand - because every year, I might change something based on what I saw.

This year, watching the Olympics and the VNL right before that, I noticed some definite patterns in the men's game. I've always thought the men's game leads the women's game - some of the top women's teams get that way because they're monitoring what's happening in the men's game.

Even watching some beach volleyball, which I don't watch much of, I noticed there's so much more hitting on two. On the indoor side of things, Japan's men's team was the best at handling balls coming over the net. When their setter would take it, they'd throw it to the middle where traditionally people get it to the libero to set someone. Their pipe hitters were jumping and either hitting or setting a back set to the four or a fast set to the five. That's a training thing, but it's beautiful.

If I was still coaching college, we'd be doing that because if you can do things in your gym that force teams to spend time defending it, that's better than everybody doing the same thing and just seeing how we play, hoping we make fewer errors or somebody going off and having an exceptional game.

When there wasn't much video available, I would sometimes walk down to the other gym if the men were practicing and have my players sit there and watch. The men are doing it faster, stronger, jumping higher. I wouldn't do this with players who were physically unable to perform at the next level, but for those who could and weren't doing it in practice - sometimes they were visual learners rather than just listening to me saying, "No, no, you got to be up faster. We need to hit the one ball like the men are hitting it."

You've got to be in the air - they're like "Oh, okay, one ball," and you're like "No, I want you to be in the air before the setter releases the ball so that if they don't block it and you hit it higher, they don't dig it. Now we're getting points."

I have a vast library, unfortunately many in VHS tapes and DVDs because my staff knew I didn't want to just use Volleymetrics.

I understand its importance, but for me, I wanted to watch everything - what you were doing in a timeout, who was talking to whom.

I wasn't just watching rotation by rotation, although I watched it differently than my staff. They would all look at the same output from Volleymetrics.

That's why I always kept my own stats. If I hit the ball out of bounds and you're in the net, I'm getting credited with a kill - and that's not a kill. I hit the ball out of bounds. I'm trying to get better on my side of the net. So my stats were always different than the NCAA box score.

I was very anal about certain things, even though I never felt I was ever the smartest guy in any room. I always felt I was working harder than everybody I was working against.

If you were a coach in today's game, with all that video content available, would you feel like there would be a diminishing return watching so many hours of video?

I bet I watch more video now than 90 percent of Division I coaches, and I'm not even in the game - though I'm helping some pro teams. So I'm watching some pro players, and I'm watching to find out some systematic things maybe.

I watched too much, and my wife would say that even now when I don't really have any skin in the game. But my skin in the game is wanting to know what's going on. When my friend from Michigan comes to visit, I can talk about Michigan.

(Hi, Coley Pawlikowski... 🙂)

I can say, "Hey, you know, you got two people hitting 60 percent of the swings," and I know where they hit from the left side, right side, and back row. Nobody's asking me, but when we're talking to an agent or a pro coach about somebody, I already know this stuff. I don't have to call the coach and ask what they think - I've seen them play quite a bit.

I watched the same amount for a last-place team as I did for a first-place team, which doesn't make sense to a lot of people.

They'd say, "You've never lost to this team in 30 years. Why would you spend any time?" And I'd say, "The reason we did win for 30 years is I recognize that every match in the conference has the same value."

I like to talk to coaches and hear what they think when they watch something. I knew my team better than anybody, but somebody could walk in the gym and watch us play a match, and I wanted to know, "Hey, what did you think?" Because sometimes you're so close, you're in it, you don't even see the forest for the trees.

If you're a coach, you need to know your team first, and then after you know your team, then you need to look at the next team. Back in the old days in the Big Ten, we would play two matches, Friday and Saturday. So I would be a week ahead. On Monday, we would be doing a blocking drill, and I'd say, "Friday's opponent does this, Saturday's opponent maybe doesn't do that."

Like when Hugh was at Minnesota, they would run middle attack from 12-15 feet off the net because the Tapp sisters were really good, and their setter was really good - they practiced it and were excellent at it. So if we were playing them and another school, I'd say, "This other school doesn't do that at all, so don't just release on a ball that's off the net thinking it's out of system, because Minnesota's in system extends way further than others."

Do we see all of that in Volleymetrics? I wouldn't think so, but I don't know. I used to talk to Giuseppe all the time and say, "Hey, I have concerns about some of these things because I don't think they correlate well with what I think."

Watching video is important, for sure, but you have to recognize it's always about the team you have.

You're shaping your team to be the best they can be. And there are times where you're going to put that team together and it's going to exceed the performance of somebody who's got better players.

This is where the Art of Coaching comes in. (pun intended 😊) How do you approach building a cohesive team when having top players alone isn’t enough?

Having the best players in the country doesn't guarantee you'll have the best team. It means you might have the best players come all-star time, or they're going to have extended professional careers.

But if you have the best players AND they're committed to being the best team, then you have a shot at being one of the top teams.

One of the arts of coaching is getting people to understand that every team is different. The communication model is different for everybody. A lot of people are committed to writing everything on the whiteboard so everybody knows what's going on - and that's great.

But for me, I have these books in my office - 43 years of Penn State - because I was the one writing out practice. It wasn't important for me that they knew; it was important that we got through what I wanted to get through.

Being an elementary school teacher, I knew when you have a clock on the wall in front of you, you can see all the kids looking up at it. If they know the bell's going to ring in 30 seconds, they're all getting their books together, their backpacks, everybody's moving.

A lot of players now, that's how they learn. That's what they do at Michigan - the head coach was with Karch for the last eight years, and obviously that model works. Our men's volleyball team is successful and they do it, but there are some things I don't want them to know, because every drill for me was competitive, but I wouldn't always write what we're playing for.

Sometimes I would say, "Okay, you're playing to 25 and you're going to do a push-up, a sit-up, and a 30-foot sprint for the difference between your score and the other team's score." Or, "The winners go to 10 and 10, and the losers are doing multiples of two for every point they lost by." And if we ever got shut out in a drill, it was double.

When people say, "Coach had us do something and it took us 45 minutes," I'd say, "Hey, they earned it. I didn't give it to them as a gift - it was available for the other team as well."

Now you can't do that because somebody would say, "Well, I think that's punishment." And I'd be like, "Losing isn't punishment enough?"

So I just did it my way. I didn't say other people's ways were right, wrong, or different. I just did it the way I liked to do it. I was more interested in competitive behavior than I was in perfect technique.

As we regularly spar about international teams, and I know you're very knowledgeable here: What are your thoughts on the dominance of certain teams in volleyball at both the Olympic and college levels?

You know, there have been 16 Olympics, and there's an interesting pattern in volleyball. On the men's side, eight teams have won all 16 gold medals, while on the women's side, seven teams have won all 16. Obviously, when Cuba won three in a row, that skewed things a bit on the women's side.

But in the men's game, I think there's so much more depth now. When I watched VNL and the Olympics, I was surprised - I mean, I didn't even know Slovenia was suddenly more than relevant in the men's game.

It's similar in USA college volleyball too. In men's volleyball, there have been 54 national championships over 54 years, and only 12 teams have won all of them. On the women's side, it's 12 teams winning 43 championships. There must be a reason for this pattern.

Now things are different because of NIL (Name, Image, Likeness), which is probably more relevant in women's volleyball than men's. In the women's game now, you can play against a team in preseason, see they have an unbelievable player, and the coaches are plotting: "How am I going to get her to my team mid-year? How much is it going to cost me to buy that player?"

That's actually one of the reasons I'm not coaching anymore - not that it's wrong, it's just what it is.

I didn't want to be both the general manager and the head coach. They do that in the NFL and NBA, but usually there's a problem with it.

For me, it wasn't something I could wrap my arms around.

I liked coaching, competing, helping players be the best they can be, and finding kids who wanted to work really hard and be tough - because life is tough.

But now, I'd have been spending all my time raising money to compete, to buy the best players and pay them more than I got paid for the first 35 years of my professional career. That would be crazy.

I'd look at somebody and go, "Hey, you're making $100,000?" And I was eligible for the cheese program in Center County with a wife and four kids at $18,000 a year. So I don't feel uncomfortable telling you, "Hey, maybe you should serve in."

What would you say to ambitious coaches aiming to grow and coach Division I volleyball in today’s NIL-driven landscape?

What does NIL mean to me? It means 'now it's legal'. Before, it wasn't - and it wasn't happening in volleyball that I knew of. But in basketball, whenever there was a big scandal, now we know how much money the SEC was paying to get the top recruits in basketball, or whatever it was in football across various conferences.

So now, you almost have to assign somebody just to make sure the players on your team are happy. I always wanted them to get better. The fact that they can just pick up and leave, that's okay. But hey, that's not what I wanted to see happening.

There's still going to be schools that attract players who go to their school because it's the school they want to go to. They want to be coached honestly and fairly, and they're going to be committed, stick it out, and stay.

But even pro teams - I mean, just look at the WNBA. Seven of the twelve teams' coaches have been fired. They're making between $700,000 and $1.2 million. So owners or managers - and I'm sure it's the same in the European pro leagues - if it's not good, they're just going to get rid of the coach.

Coaches go from coaching one national team to another national team, one pro team here to another pro team or in a different country. Sometimes they're getting more money and moving up, which would make sense. And sometimes it's just that the owner or the players didn't like what you were doing, and you're out the door.

They bring in somebody who they hope is going to be the flavor of the month to the owners or players.

I like it when the coaches were making decisions, not the players.

And just for food for thought, some of our college players are making more money in college than they're going to get when they go pro, for sure in football and basketball.

The top young basketball player in this country right now is being offered $5 million in NIL money. And you know, the quarterback at Colorado, Deion's son Shedeur, is making more money than if he was a rookie - the rookie salary in the NFL is $900,000. All the big schools have players making over a million dollars. And that's in addition to a scholarship and all these other little perks that happen.

With PVF last year, when they did their first year, there were 7 teams, but there might have been 10 or 12 liberos all making $60,000 a year.

I'm thinking that's more than any of the libero's around the world - who are the best libero's in the world - were making on their teams. And I was trying to say, you guys might consider a salary cap.

I said, hey, it's great for those players - and I had one of them who was doing it - but you know, because she played in Europe, she was like, "No, I was making less money playing in Europe than I made playing in the PVF."

So in a way we're saying that coaching in the NIL landscape is just that, the new normal, right?

NIL is a big part of the future for other coaches, though it may change in the next few years. It's a big part of what's happening now in US college sports. A lot of coaches in various sports are retiring at this point because they can, and because some of these other factors have made the environment totally different than what they're accustomed to.

If I was a young coach coming in, I would find a way to make it work because it's just the norm.

It's like saying to somebody, "Hey, before in 1981, we played games to 15 with traditional scoring," and they go, "What do you mean traditional scoring?"

And I'd be like, "We would do drills where you had to serve to score." Not to let the practice go on til forever, but sometimes when we were doing competitive games at the end, I didn't want to do deuce games. And you had to score the real way, not the new way.

The transition to pro volleyball will be challenging for American coaches and players used to college-level support. In the pro-environment, franchises often handle details less reliably, so you must adapt to unexpected issues and still focus on performance.

I worked as a consultant for one of the pro teams, and I watched every single match that the PVF played last year - not just the team I was working with, but every match. I'm probably one of very few people who did that. I'd take notes, partly to prepare for when we'd play against them, but mostly to observe the players and coaches.

The transition from college to pro coaching has quite a few differences. I think the PVF did a lot of really good things. While the level of play wasn't consistently great every night, I believe they managed the league well. I only attended one game in person, but the match energy and crowd engagement were terrific - and this was between two teams that finished tied for 4th or 5th place, with a good crowd turnout.

Now with LOVB coming in - they have several international coaches, which will be interesting. It seems like the majority of rosters are U.S. players, each team typically has two to three national team players plus some international players. So if that's five or six out of the 12 or 13 players, the other half are American players, many of whom have likely played in various leagues worldwide.

When I was coaching at Penn State, players would tell me they wanted to go pro. I'd tell them, "You can find a place to play. You might not make much money, but on weekends, you could travel from one country to another and have an incredible learning experience."

It's like how MBA programs often want you to travel for a year or two before starting - they don't want you to just go from school to school. They want you to have life experiences.

My first head coaching job was with a men's pro team in Puerto Rico, around 1974. It was different - the players listened to me because I wasn't from Puerto Rico. I didn't have this vast knowledge, but I made them work really hard because I thought that's what pros should do. They were probably all making more money than me, but hey - I wasn't stuck in Chicago's winter, I was in the mountains of Puerto Rico!

I tell my children, "Not all experiences are good, but they're all valuable."

You have to recognize that's how it goes. Sometimes I had great scouting reports that went wrong, or I'd watch practice thinking we were playing really well, only to see the team implode during the game.

I still do coaching seminars, and I tell people about the seven national championships we won when I was the coach. People might think those were the best seven teams I coached - but I would say absolutely not. We won a couple of championships when I didn't think we should have, and we lost some where I thought we had a better chance of winning than how it turned out.

What were impactful lessons you took from your international coaching travels, and how did these experiences shape your approach to training and competition?

When we visited Brazil, Bernardinho was incredibly generous and allowed us to watch his men's team practice. It was very mindful - every time he tossed the ball, he took pride in ensuring each toss was exactly right for what he wanted to achieve in the drill.

We ended up incorporating many of their training methods into our practices, though we were already doing some similar things. They had big, strong guys on boxes just blasting the ball because that's how they would start the rally. Or they'd begin with a serve, and the team would attack with no block, hitting as hard as they could at Sergio - that's how the drill started.

When you have the talent, you keep moving the bar up. That was my coaching philosophy.

Everything we achieved was because that was always my intent. I deliberately set the bar so high that people would have to make risky decisions to play at that level. Sure, there were times we stumbled and fumbled, but my thought was always: harder and more challenging is better.

There's a video that just came out called "The Streak" about when we won four championships in a row. But here's the thing - we never discussed it.

Every day in practice, I would take my normal notes and have one-on-one conversations: "Hey, this is what you need to work on to get a little better. This is what you did great over the weekend, but here's what you need to fine-tune." Everyone knew the push was always forward - it wasn't about patting yourself on the back just because you were ranked number one or ranked high.

When I look at coaching now and watch matches, it's different. Coaches are standing up more, some have great fire, some are more calm. There are many ways to coach teams. This applies to national teams, and I'm sure to pro teams too. But at the end of the day, if you don't win, you don't win - you're replaceable.

Pro players need to develop the skills to balance their club and national team demands, manage long off-seasons, and prioritize their physical well-being with minimal guidance. They need to learn to become a pro.

"Everything matters" - that's what I used to tell our players. I'd say, "If you want to play pro, understand that everything's going to matter. Rest is going to matter, making good decisions, keeping your body strong - just everything. You can't be wild and crazy and think it's not going to catch up with you at some point."

The people who are true pros, the ones who understand this, they're going to chew you up and spit you out because they've been through it.

Maybe someone did that to them 15 years ago, and they learned their lesson: keep your mouth shut, get in there and grind, and you'll earn your opportunities.

I feel the same way about coaches - they need to work hard, and they'll get opportunities if their goal is to be a head coach or get involved with professional or international teams.

When the pro league started, I heard from several teams asking if I was interested. I was always appreciative, but I declined. I got out of coaching for a reason, and I didn't want to get myself back into traveling and everything else. Even though it was a professional league, it was still in its first year.

While some players had played professionally, others were just out of college. As you mentioned, they're used to people giving them new shoes all the time, and they are pretty privileged. Not all teams are going to have everything set up in a certain way.

For me, I enjoyed my time coaching - it was close to 50 years of it, 47 at the collegiate level.

Now I can be a consultant and get involved in what I want to.

And you know what? I played golf this morning and didn't have to worry about stopping Michigan's two premier hitters later tonight. 🙂

USA Volleyball is undergoing some changes. What do you see in the future of USA Volleyball?

John's career path is interesting - he might have been the national team coach for eight years, spanning two Olympics, but he was also an assistant with Hugh about 12 years ago. He was involved through UCLA, then had success coaching at Irvine, and then back at UCLA. It's an interesting model, having your foot into international volleyball and still doing great things in men's collegiate volleyball.

John was one of the leading advocates for increasing boys' volleyball participation in the United States, and I thought he did an exceptional job leading that charge.

It's a bit of a similar story of Doug Beal, going from being the coach of the national team to being in charge.

These guys have invaluable knowledge about working with FIVB, dealing with the U.S. National Governing Body, understanding how funding works, and knowing the goals. The transition from Karch bringing his expertise from the women's team to the men's team is fascinating.

Karch had his greatest success as a player, both indoor and outdoor. Then he transitioned to coaching, starting with his son's high school volleyball teams and eventually winning gold and silver medals with the women's team. Now that he's going to the men's side, it'll be interesting to see if his approach differs from how he coached the women.

Will he be more like he was as a player - very animated, aggressive, and from what I've heard from many people over the years, more verbal and competitive?

It'll also be interesting to see who they hire as the women's coach. Because I don't think there's another country in the world that has the developmental system that U.S. college teams provide for the national team. Every year, there are 10 to 15 kids who spend time in the national team gym. They don't just select the best players - I think they select the best players for their specific USA rosters and teams.

So it'll be interesting to see how this transition changes things - how will the new coach interact with the existing college players, and how will they manage that relationship?

As always, thanks so much for your time, Russ.

Resources:

I of course had to mention The Art of Coaching Volleyball, were 'friends of VolleyBrains', Terry, John and Russ have created an incredibly extensive coaching resource.



