===== SESSION: https://volleybrains.com/sanja-tomasevic/ =====

----- VIDEOS -----
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AkKFNMTJn0g
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=svlprgv0N9M
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gbuK0ryNQSU
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8vZ8cMzBsJA
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XyGVGgs6Y7M
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IZo19Zt7gXg
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dac3HwvMpes
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bygp3LDOwf4
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wU1x2_T5bgE
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eruxVRE9_uY
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ETeQPis6HAQ
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jcJZTQZq3XE
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UQCZvRjwkNE
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=L0XaxuvBuL4
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0f5nSXUFgbo

----- TEXTO -----
88. Sanja Tomasevic: Give back to move forward.

Sanja Tomasevic has experienced volleyball from every angle—student-athlete, professional player, college coach, and now assistant coach for Vakifbank, one of the world’s top volleyball teams.

As a player, Sanja was a standout at the University of Washington, leading the Huskies to four NCAA tournament appearances, including the 2005 NCAA National Championship, while earning multiple All-American honors. Her professional playing career spanned Europe and Asia, where she showcased her skills on the international stage.

Transitioning to coaching, Sanja held assistant coaching roles at the University of Miami, UTSA and served as head coach at Arizona State University (2017–2022). Now, she is an assistant coach at Vakifbank Spor Kulubu, one of the world's most prestigious pro club teams.

What makes Sanja truly remarkable is the breadth of her experiences. Few people in volleyball have seen the sport through so many lenses—from playing at the highest levels to coaching in both collegiate and professional settings.

This makes her a uniquely valuable voice, offering insights that cover every aspect of the game.

Key takeaways from this article include:

The power of listening as a cornerstone of effective coaching.

Why staying stuck in outdated methods hinders progress.

Strategies for continuous learning and using time effectively.

Team management with individual autonomy through team values.

The place that passion has in a demanding profession.

The role of connection and respect in team environments.

Insights into modern volleyball rules and their impact on the game.

Finding balance and purpose as an athlete and a coach.

We have 55 minutes of video interview with coach Tomasevic in this article. Enjoy!

Enter Sanja...

Sanja, what advice would you give yourself as a starting coach? An advice that is so clear and logic for you now, but that you had to develop over the years.

A big thing for me would be listen, listen, listen. As coaches, we learn a lot along the way - whether it's in the classroom, through volleyball experience, or whatnot. When we see a blank canvas or someone young who wants to learn, we tend to want to talk a lot.

But we can actually learn so much more by listening - listening to our team, to our players as individuals.

I can only speak to coaching women's teams since I've never coached men's teams. But with women, it's all about connection. If a player feels like we can connect, they're more likely to work hard and follow through on everything you say.

Many times we jump straight to "do this, do this, do this," rather than taking the time to get to know and learn about them first. So my advice would be: listen, listen and learn about your team and your players before you start teaching volleyball.

What's a common mistake you see volleyball coaches still making today?

Being stuck in the past is a major pitfall - whether it's being stuck with a team that worked before, stuck in the year that worked for you, or stuck in certain ways of doing things mentally or physically. The game has improved tremendously.

Players are taller, faster, jumping higher, and hitting harder. The game has changed so much, and we need to be flexible and continue to educate ourselves so we can translate this knowledge to our players on the court. If we still teach volleyball the way it was taught when I started in the 90s, we're in big trouble. I mean, in the 90s, we didn't even have Google!

Now we have access to all this data and technology. Every day there's something new coming out - tools to speed up reaction time, enhance this or that. With VR and everything else that's developing, there's no reason for us to be stuck in the past. We need to keep learning and educating ourselves so we can be the best we can be for our athletes.

How do you go about continuously learning? Is it being in contact with people in different kind of leagues, on different kinds of levels. How do you personally do that?

First of all, let me share my background. After finishing my coaching role at Arizona State University, I had about six months to explore what I wanted to do next. During that time, I got certified as a sports life coach. While the concepts I learned weren't exactly revolutionary, they made me think about things in ways I never had before.

One of the key concepts we learned was about "24 golden nuggets" – referring to the 24 hours we get each day. Let's say you spend eight of those sleeping (though parents might disagree with getting that much sleep!). Even then, you still have plenty of hours left to accomplish what you need to do.

It's all about prioritizing within those 24 hours and finding where everything fits. Now, if I told you I dedicate two hours every day to learning, I'd be lying. But I can commit to learning for an hour or two every other day. And if I miss a day, I don't beat myself up about it – I just get back to it.

How do I keep learning? I stay connected with my peers. We have this understanding where we don't expect immediate responses from each other, but we'll share podcasts or interesting content with messages like, "Hey, check this out." It doesn't need to turn into a full conversation – it's more like saying, "I'm thinking about you, here's something interesting." We both understand we're busy, and that's okay.

You can also just Google whatever's on your mind. Think about what's the topic of the week, usually something your team is dealing with at the time. Is your team struggling with crossover steps and blocking? Having trouble with reading? You can find plenty of videos about these topics online. The resources are endless. We just need to prioritize our time.

That's really the big takeaway – those 24 golden nuggets and how we use them.

Sure, you might spend some time scrolling through TikTok as a pastime occasionally, but is that making you a better coach? Probably not.

It's important for our athletes to understand this too. Each day isn't the end of the journey – it's just the end of that day. Tomorrow starts fresh with new opportunities and new 24 golden nuggets to invest in. Instead of saying "this whole week" or "this whole month has been bad," we should ask ourselves: Why has it been challenging? What can we change about it?

What's your philosophy on team rules as a coach?

From my journey as a player to assistant coach and then head coach, I've learned something interesting about rules. Often, rules exist simply because someone thought "we should have a rule for this" – and it makes you wonder about their purpose. Sometimes these rules turn coaches into full-time police officers, constantly controlling and checking.

This takes a lot of time and energy, with little to no benefit. If anything, it just creates a divide between coaches and players.

When I coached at the university level, having rules was mandatory – probably for legal reasons or something similar. When you have to create rules, you create them; it is what it is. But most rules are really just common sense. I would give players the rule book and tell them, "You should probably read this because you need to sign it, but here's the summary: Consider what you're here for, which is schol and volleyball. If what you're planning to do doesn't align with that purpose, don't do it."

Meaning, if it's going to negatively impact these two things,don't do it. But if you can maintain a high level in both areas, you can do whatever you want.

You're an individual, a human being, and you should do whatever fills up your tank at the end of the day. That's how I feel about rules.

However, I believe values and behaviors are more important and need to be established and discussed.

In college, that's something we talk about during the recruiting process. In professional sports, like here at Vakifbank, Giovanni discusses our values and behaviors with the team on day one. When everyone arrives from their national teams with different schedules, it's the first conversation we have – and it has nothing to do with volleyball.

It's about who we are as people, how we treat others around us, and what kind of effort we expect to give to this season and team.

These things are non-negotiable. For example, when we leave the gym, we must leave it pristine – better than when we came in. If someone left an empty water bottle in the gym before we arrived, we clean that up, and then we make sure there's no trash left behind us when we leave. These little things really add up.

It's about having an attitude of gratitude. We are the chosen ones – athletes who have been blessed with talent that we've discovered. Many people are blessed with talent, but not everyone discovers it. We've gotten where we are because of our talent. Now the question is: How do we show gratitude and stay in the process?

Staying humble is really important when you're a high-level athlete, whether in college or professional sports. Even when you think about college athletes – it doesn't matter which university you're playing at – we're talking about maybe 7% of high school volleyball players who end up playing college volleyball on scholarship. That's pretty blessed.

How did you handle individual player meetings in your program, and how does that compare to how it's done at Vakifbank?

When I was running my own program, I implemented one-minute weekly meetings. When you're working with student-athletes, their schedules are incredibly packed – with school being the priority, and volleyball following close behind. Everything adds up, and we have to remember they're college kids.

I felt it was crucial to connect with them and let them know where they stood. We called them "one-minute meetings," but the actual length varied by student. With some athletes, it really was just one minute; with others, it might stretch to five minutes, but never longer. The format was simple: "Let's schedule a one-minute meeting for Tuesday after practice. We'll finish 15 minutes early to make time for these."

This was our weekly routine. It's different here with Giovanni – he meets regularly with the leadership team and has frequent check-ins with our captain, Zehra.

You've experienced volleyball from every angle - as a student-athlete, professional player, college coach, and now pro coach. Looking back at these different chapters, what's the common thread that connects all these experiences?

I think it's a loaded question because we're talking about four different worlds that I've experienced. And when I say four different worlds, I'm not joking.

Playing volleyball in Serbia, then going to America – yes, volleyball is volleyball, but it's a different world entirely. Then you move on to playing professional volleyball, which is another completely different world. Add coaching there and coaching here, and they're all distinct. The only obvious connector is volleyball itself – it's like the safe glue that holds everything together at the end of the day.

Even as a player, I always valued connection. There's connection on and off the court, and I think these need to be recognized. I wish they were talked about and emphasized more. When you're working in an environment with somebody, there has to be mutual respect, but in my opinion, respect isn't given – it's earned.

If I see you working hard, trying to master your craft every day, striving to be the best you can be, then I think, "Okay, I like her." I can like you in those three hours we're in the gym. When we get off the court, we might have nothing in common, and that's totally fine. We don't have to coexist in both worlds.

In America, there's this whole concept of "we're all family" when you join a team. But what does that even mean? Let's be real – each family is dysfunctional; there's no perfect family. Every family has that trouble child or sibling, crazy aunties, drunk uncles – this is what family really means. So how do we approach this?

I believe that during those hours in the gym, we have to earn respect by showing we're all in and fully invested in the team, whether as a player or a coach.

To do that, you have to be passionate about what you're doing. Whether it's playing volleyball or coaching, people need to see that we're 100 percent invested and passionate.

And passion is something no coach can teach. I'm working with the amazing Giovanni Guidetti here, one of the best ever probably, and even he cannot teach passion. You can hear it in his voice, see it radiating around him, but he can't teach it. If he could, he'd be a billionaire because he could bottle it up and sell it to everybody.

I think parents, first and foremost, need to pay attention to whether their kid is passionate about volleyball. It's easy to see – like my 7-year-old who's super passionate about drawing. I need to give her resources to learn and advance. She's drawing butterflies and people, and she's got passion for it. I don't know if she has talent – I'm not an artist – but I want to provide her a place where she can work with somebody who can teach her to become great at drawing because she cares about it.

The same goes for volleyball. Don't just put your kids into volleyball because your cousin played, or because you played but were never great enough, or because your daughter is taller than you were at that age. That's just projecting our expectations and dreams onto our kids.

My daughter could play volleyball at Vakifbank – they start at seven years old. Would that be a dream of mine? Absolutely. But my bigger dream is that my daughter is passionate about something. Passion drives greatness.

I've never met an athlete who was great and not passionate, near addicted to their craft. As parents, we should focus more on listening and observing our children – what are they passionate about?

That's a big lesson I've learned from traveling the world, playing for many teams, playing with different people.

The desire to connect and earn respect comes from people seeing how invested you are, how much you're giving. It all goes back to passion.

Look at Gabi Guimaraes, the best outside hitter in the world. We can talk about Gabi for hours. If you see her, she's the most humble, down-to-earth, hardest working player who never stops investing in herself.

It would be easy for her to say, "I'm Gabi" – and yes, I know many Gabi's in the world, but we refer to only one as just "Gabi." Yet she never stops investing in herself.

Can you tell us about the moment you decided to transition from playing to coaching, and how that journey has evolved?

I reached a point where I wasn't passionate about playing anymore. Volleyball became just a job – I'd go in, do my best, but whether we lost or won, it really didn't matter anymore.

I vividly remember sitting in my car in Italy before going into the gym for finals. It was the A2 finals, and I kept trying to hype myself up: "It's finals. You need to care. You have to care. Come on!"

This was with Casal Maggiore, their first year moving up from B1 to A2. Nobody expected anything big from us – we were supposed to finish fifth or sixth, just stay in the middle of the league. Then we started playing well, and next thing you know, we're in the finals against a team that was built and paid specifically for winning the finals. We were the underdogs, and normally, that would get me fired up. I'd usually think, "I'll show you who's the underdog!" But this time, that feeling wasn't there. It started happening after New Year's, and I kept wondering, "Why doesn't it matter anymore?"

I was losing my passion, and I didn't think that was fair to my teammates, my coaches, or myself. I never want to do something I'm not passionate about in my life. I hope I never have to work a job just for a paycheck. Yes, I was getting paid more playing professional volleyball than I would as an assistant coach in college, but I needed a transition.

Why coaching? Well, volleyball had given me so much in my life. Think about nine-year-old Sanja, starting to play in Prijepolje, Serbia – a small town of 40,000 people. I never dreamed I'd end up where I did. Volleyball was the driving factor for all of that, giving me so many opportunities in life. I wanted to give back, to provide those same opportunities to other girls and young women.

I didn't know it would become my career path, but I wasn't ready to give up volleyball entirely.

My first year coaching was mostly me playing. I really didn't know what I didn't know, especially about college coaching. Recruiting was a huge learning curve – I had no idea how it worked since I was recruited from Europe. Have you seen these tournaments? At AAUs, you'll have 18,000 kids playing in one gym, and you're supposed to find three for scholarships. I was just along for the ride, completely lost.

That first year, my head coach taught me a valuable lesson: just because something is common sense to you doesn't mean it's common sense to others.

That nugget has stuck with me throughout my coaching career – just assume they don't know; it's better to give them information they already have than to assume they know and never share that piece of advice.

This translates even to Vakifbank. Last year, I'd sometimes wonder what I could possibly tell players like Zehra, Gabi, or Chiaka that they haven't heard before.

But there were many moments where I'd share something, and they'd say, "Aha, thanks!" With athletes at this level, they know you're on their side, trying to help them improve, not pointing out their weaknesses.

After that, I coached at UTSA for two seasons, then went to the University of Miami with one of the best humans in the world, Keno Gandara. He was my assistant coach when I was in college at the University of Washington, became head coach at Miami, and is still there. Then I spent seven years at Arizona State.

When I finished at Arizona State, the passion was dwindling again. I felt like I was giving too much, and the return wasn't there. It was affecting my health, my private life – everything – and the return wasn't worth it.

I was ready to be done coaching. After 33 years of volleyball, starting at age nine, I thought it was enough. That's why I enrolled in sports life coaching – to stay connected to sports but in a different way.

Then Giovanni called, and how do you say no to Giovanni and Vakifbank? And here I am, coaching again and feeling very passionate about it.

What was the journey like to arrive at Vakifbank, especially since you were ready to leave coaching altogether?

I was sitting at home, done with coaching, having a play date with my friend who's not from sports. Our daughters were playing, we were all having a good time, when my phone buzzed. It was a WhatsApp message saying, "Hi, Sanja. This is Giovanni Guidetti." I put the phone down thinking, "Yeah, right."

I thought it was one of my college coaching friends trying to encourage me or get me to be an assistant coach. They know I consider Giovanni one of the best coaches out there and that I highly regard him - watching his coaching, listening to him talk, seeing how his team plays with so much passion.

When my friend asked what was on my phone, I said, "You wouldn't even understand, but my coaching friends are being silly." She suggested, "Maybe it is him." So I checked the phone number, and it was from Europe.

The conversation started with him explaining he got my number from Kasey Crider, who does the motor learning podcast. He was looking for a female coach, knowing there are more female coaches in America than in high-level European volleyball, he reached out to several of us on his list. He contacted me on Wednesday or Thursday, asking to talk on Sunday, then moved it up to Saturday.

We connected and had an amazing talk. For me, I just wanted to meet him and understand who this person was as a coach. I wasn't thinking at all about going to Istanbul, Turkey. When we finished talking, he said, "I found my coach. I want you to be my assistant coach. What do I need to do to get you here?" I replied, "Oh, I don't want to coach." He was surprised: "What do you mean you don't want to coach?" I explained I just wanted to talk to him because it was him.

We discussed why I didn't want to coach anymore. The big reason was that I couldn't teach someone to care as much as I care. My family was suffering, my health was suffering. He asked what I was planning to do instead. I told him I'd get a regular job, maybe something philanthropic. He responded, "You can do that when you're done coaching. This kind of job presents itself now, and I don't know when it will present itself again."

He's really hard to say no to, by the way. He wouldn't hang up until I at least agreed to think about it. I called my sports life coach afterward, and while getting ready for the day, I realized I was excited about this possibility. It didn't make sense - I didn't want to coach, but I was excited again?

Logic said no to picking up my five-year-old and moving across the world to Istanbul, Turkey. But my heart was saying it could be really cool. Vakifbank is one of those teams that's just a dream to coach or play for. My life coach guided me through some questions, and we came up with what would make this a "10" job - worth moving anywhere for. One requirement was visiting in person, not just watching on TV.

They made it happen, even during playoffs and Champions League preparation. I came for just over 24 hours to see everything. During that time, I had dinner with Chi, Gabi, and Kara Bajema. We discussed why they wanted a female coach. Initially, I didn't want to be "just" a female coach, but then I realized if guys were in the same position, they'd proudly own being the only male coach.

I am the only female coach who's coached at Vakifbank and at any Champions League top-level teams.

I'm very grateful to Giovanni for providing that opportunity and listening to his players. They wanted someone on the bench who could understand them and relate to their experience.

I want to use this opportunity to plant a seed in other coaches' heads. Many teams in Europe have extensive resources with six to eight coaches on their staff, but none are females. None have been those girls on the court doing what they're doing.

Giovanni's staff is amazing - Saim's valuable knowledge, Fiko's expertise, Fatih's scouting mastery - but they haven't experienced the game the way Derya, Zehra, Ali, and Marina have to do it.

There are women out there who have that experience and similar knowledge to be here. I'm grateful to be in this position and to be one of the pioneers, hoping other people will look at Giovanni and realize he's doing something right by having at least one female on the staff.

What was the moment that convinced you to take the Vakifbank position?

When I came here to visit, they were playing Turkish Airlines for third place. I sat down with Giovanni with my list of questions, and I remember having a conversation with Gabi and Chi. I made it clear: Yes, I'm a woman, but I'm not coming to be their mom - they all have moms. I'm a mom to somebody else, but I want to be a coach.

That's a big thing that's always put on us females - we're expected to be loving and caring, and we are. We can't turn that side off, but at the same time, we are coaches. If I need to tell you, "Hey, make sure you're pressing over, you're too far up" or "Make sure you're reading," I'm going to do it.

I'll still do what coaches do while caring and being invested in you as a human off the court, which is normal.

I remember sitting at dinner with Gabi and Chi at this amazing sushi place in Istanbul, and at one point, Gabi said, "Can you just record a message now saying you're accepting the position so I can send it to Giovanni?" I think the girls were sold just as I was sold. That dinner solidified it for me - I wanted to work with these women.

It was such a 360-degree moment. In December, I was miserable, sad, and felt like I wasn't enough. And here I was, sitting with arguably the best players in the world, and they're telling me to come and be here, that they want me. It really showed me that nothing is forever - winning, losing, nothing. It came full circle in that moment.

I decided I wanted to take the job. The next day, I had breakfast with Giovanni to go over some nuances. On the way back home, I thought, "Well, we're moving to Istanbul. That's what's happening." Then it was just going through the logistics - how we'd do it, finding a school for Stella. Now we're in our second year here. She goes to an amazing school, and our life is different.

What does it mean to you to be a female coach at this level, and what changes would you like to see in the sport?

The world needs all of us. Just as it needs women in coaching and in whatever positions women want to be in. It's almost 2025 - can we make a little room for people to come through instead of elbowing and guarding, making sure nobody enters just because "we've been here attacking balls for the last 10 years"?

There might be a woman who just finished playing professional volleyball last year, who has won three Champions Leagues - maybe she has some value to add to this team. Will I ever hit the ball as hard as a 27-year-old man who is in our gym? Absolutely not. Nor do I have a desire to do that. I've done that when it was my time to do that.

There is value to all of us being where we are. I am so grateful to Giovanni for providing a space for that and, most importantly, for listening to his players who said, "Hey, we have 14-15 staff members and there's not one woman on the staff. None of them are like us." For him to listen and provide something like that to his players - it tells you everything about what kind of leadership we're dealing with here.

As someone who's played and coached at the highest level, what rule changes would you like to see in volleyball?

I think the big important rule that I was really passionate about was taking away doubles, and I can't wait for it to be fully implemented in pro volleyball.

I know that in college volleyball it's taken away and the second contact is not called double anymore. Because nobody has ever gone "oh, let me double this one to my attacker." It's already a disadvantage - you're gonna get a bad attack, you're gonna get a free ball back. So there's really no advantage to this, and it leaves a lot to interpretation for the officials who many times have not played volleyball at the high level.

This was one of the most painful conversations I had in this environment. I was part of a panel in PAC 12 with officials and another coach. The discussion was about doubles and should they call it or not, what's considered double and what's not.

And legitimately, I listened to them talk about "this is not a double because it's Lauren Carlini" - well, they didn't say it's Lauren Carlini, but they said "it's athletic play." And "this is a double because it's not athletic play."

I'm thinking, so this kid never had a chance walking into the gym because she's not Lauren Carlini? And this girl, everything she does is going to be athletic, so she's free of doubles today? I asked them, "How many of you guys have played volleyball? Can you please raise your hand?" Less than 10 percent played volleyball. I was like, "I am so sorry, but for you guys to decide what's athletic play and what's not - it makes me really uncomfortable as a coach."

Now that that's removed, I'm actually really happy because I really don't think there's an advantage when you double a ball. If you double it coming to my side, it should be called because it's harder to read, but not when it's staying on your side.

People move up on a jump float, and take them overhead - on the first touch, which kind of direction are you going there.

I still think it should be allowed. I don't think carries should be allowed - holding it and bringing it up, that's different. We're talking about carries versus doubles. Carries actually give you an advantage, but doubles - if you pass the ball and double on first contact, your setter is already in trouble. You don't need extra punishment. But if you hold it and play it, now we're talking about huge advantage. And men do that quite a bit.

And then what about the third touch?

I hate it - the throw, like the grab and throw. People do it with two hands, grab and throw. That's a dunk. If I move my hands and you do that, if I don't block and I move my hands down, you will see that's not a pure volleyball play. That's a whole grab and throw. I am very, very against that one because there's no way to defend it. You cannot block it because they are throwing it, and you cannot defend it because who's standing there waiting for that bomb?

It's a huge advantage. My thought is, if we're not taking it away, then coaches need to get in the gym and start training it because it's really hard to defend. Then again, you're talking about officials - sometimes they'll blow the whistle, sometimes they won't. Are you going to tell me you saw a difference from here to here (raising and lowering the hand)? That's how good your eye is? Come on.

And another thing is that, for a long time now, I've thought that men's nets should be raised.

I think men's volleyball has become just like this out-of-this-world kind of thing. I mean, it's unsafe. Like, why are we up to our waist on the net blocking when somebody is hitting over 130 kilometers an hour on the other side? It's just insane to me that that is still out there. We should probably think about raising the net a little bit higher for men. Women are getting there, but not yet there.

If you could have a gigantic billboard anywhere with anything on it — metaphorically speaking, getting a message out to every athlete on the globe — what would it say and why?

The big one that stands out is very simple: You are enough. When you're a high achiever, which many people are when they're playing high-level sports, there's imposter syndrome. Should I be here? Should I not? What can I do? But do your best and you're enough. Social media has opened a can of worms, allowing people to have opinions and hide behind keyboards and usernames.

I tell myself "you're enough" many times because it's easy to get wrapped up in what we haven't done or what's missing rather than think about everything we have done and completed.

When I have athletes struggling here with lack of confidence, we go over their resume. Let's pull up all the things you have won. I write it down, and many times they forget many achievements. I remind them, hand them the list to read. When they read it, you can see the smile, see their shoulders dropping down.

I tell them, "That's you, not somebody else. That's you."I do that with myself too - I learned this from my life coach.

It's important to give yourself grace and give yourself credit for everything you have, not get wrapped up in what is missing - this last game we lost, this trophy we didn't win. Like Giannis from the Milwaukee Bucks said in his interview, you don't get promoted every year. So why should the expectation be to win a championship every year? Michael Jordan played 15 seasons and won six NBA championships. What about the other nine - were they failures? We're talking about one of the greatest ever.

"You are enough" is a big one for me to remember as a coach and to remind my athletes. And then another thing, not for the billboard but part of the conversation to have with them, is that it's not the end of the world. Nothing is forever. The good moments are there, we celebrate them, but they're gone. The bad ones are there too, but they'll be gone as well. But certain things in certain people's lives are forever.

This is where philanthropy is super important. Giving back as athletes and coaches, especially as athletes - spending time with those less fortunate, with ones who view you as a god of volleyball or basketball or whatever you're playing. It's super important to spend time with people who are less fortunate than us. It doesn't always have to be financial - it can be time, attention, or a t-shirt you never wore. It can be very simple things.

One of the books I always recommend to athletes is "Promise of a Pencil." It's a great book about how much difference a pencil can make in a kid's life. It puts things in perspective - something as simple as a pencil can change lives. Here we are thinking about losing the last match. Yes, it hurts and it should hurt, and we should learn from it, but there are bigger things in life.

If you ground yourself, put your heart in it, and understand that - if faith is in your heart, if philanthropy is what's driving you - then it makes everything else part of the big picture, not so narrow and small-minded.

Being just in your own world gets heavy. It really gets heavy and never feels enough. So the bottom line is: you are enough, and we want you to know you're enough.

What is an unusual habit or an absurd thing that you love?

I still do the same routines I did as a player before games. I was taught the old school - Serbian, Russian mentality - where the game is a sacred place. We're going into this, it's a war.

For me, I have to take a shower right before we go. I put everything in the same order, the way I would as a player. Obviously, I don't wear spandex anymore, but it's in the exact same order. Even which foot goes in first when I walk into the gym.

People say athletes are superstitious, but I think we have rituals and routines. These traveled with me from Serbia to America, from America to Korea, Puerto Rico, and now in Turkey - they're just always there with me as that safe place. I don't know if that's absurd, but that's just what I still do. I did it as a coach in America too.

Before I took the sports life coaching course, I didn't read or listen to as many books as I do right now. It's become this pastime obsession. I used to read a lot when I was a kid - Perry Mason, Agatha Christie, books about crime and solving crime. By seventh grade, I'd read every single book in the library that had anything to do with that. Now I'm more into reading about how to advance ourselves, mindset books. If I'm not listening to podcasts, I'm listening to books.

During sports life coaching, we had to read one book a week and write a report on it. That was intense - some of these were really big books, long reads. But I got into the habit, and now while it might not be once a week, it's at least once a month, sometimes twice a month.

Then I go to sleep listening to meditation and affirmation stuff. I turn it on and have some random woman talk about how amazing and worthy you are. I actually started doing this as a mom to my daughter - we'd watch these videos, and in the morning while doing her hair, we'd say "I'm strong" and she'd repeat it. When she was little, we did that, and then I started doing it too.

It's a lot better to fall asleep to that than to lay down in bed and think about what I have going on tomorrow. Tomorrow is already taken care of - I have the list, I know exactly what needs to happen.

But for some reason, when I lay down, if I don't listen to these affirmations and meditation stuff, I get completely wrapped up in the what-ifs and buts.

Can you share some of the resources that have helped shape your approach to coaching and personal development?

Let me my podcast app and tell you exactly what I like. I really enjoy Jon Gordon - he talks about a lot of the stuff I believe in. I love High Performance and Brené Brown. Really, Brené Brown's books are amazing. Everything she talks about resonates.

Usually, this is how it works: somebody sends me a podcast, and I start with one episode. Then I get into the next one, and the next one. "Coach Your Brains Out" is another one.

I love listening to your stuff too. I really value the mix of the two worlds that I've lived in and how they coincide.

Then there's stuff I listen to that has nothing to do with volleyball or sports - it's more mindset-related and about feelings and things like that.

What are books that you would recommend?

What I want to do more of next year is build on my habit of reading and listening to audiobooks. Here's the thing - I'll read 4 or 5 books after a good book, but then I forget exactly why I liked it.

When I did this course, we had to answer specific questions about each book we read. Next year, I want to start doing that again. I want to answer those questions about why I like these books, because then you can have those conversations with your son or daughter and think, "Oh, this is what's going on in his or her head - they should probably read this book."

Let me tell you about "Whale Done" - it's a short read about a guy who spent his whole life in corporate America. Nobody liked him at work or at home, but he was always agreeing, working hard, never happy. Then he happened to be in Orlando and saw how they trained orcas. The concept is instead of "well done," it's "whale done" - catching people doing right things or good things.

It's like with my daughter - it's easy to notice when she doesn't take her plate to the kitchen after eating, but when she does, I don't say anything about it. In your work, there might be bonuses after achieving certain quotas at the end of the fiscal year, but what about day-to-day stuff? Like, "Hey, I really appreciate you doing that on time" or "Thanks for making that coffee this morning."

In marriages, it's huge. People just expect their spouse to do things because it's "their job." Maybe the husband cleans the car and it's supposed to be like that - but saying "Thank you for cleaning my car, that was so nice of you" changes everything.

It goes back to filling up our heart. You don't have to do anything revolutionary - just notice it and point it out.

It makes everyone feel better - you for saying it, and the person receiving it thinking, "Oh, they appreciate me."

Another book I really love, especially for any high achiever, is "The Gap and the Gain." It's about how much time we spend in the gap, thinking about things we haven't done, haven't accomplished, comparing ourselves to others, rather than living in the gain - recognizing where we are and what we've done to get here. High achievers often live in this gap where it's never enough. We need to start recognizing the gains.

And then there's "The Promise of a Pencil" - it's a philanthropic book that I think anyone should read, whether you're a high-level athlete, a regular person, or a student.

Because there's always somebody looking at you thinking, "How are they doing it?" You have a chance to give hope to somebody else out there in the world.

Thank you, Sanja.



