===== SESSION: https://volleybrains.com/mark-lebedew/ =====

----- VIDEOS -----
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JWJ0KyjLw7Y
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YWL1Y7r9XPc

----- TEXTO -----
9. Mark Lebedew:'Focus on the single thing that will do the most to help your team win.'

Hi everyone! In this article I'm happy to feature Mark Lebedew.

Mark is the former head coach of the Australian men's national team. He has coached at many high level European teams and is for sure a mindful coach when it comes to all aspects of our game. You'll learn that in this article but even more when you check out his own blog. Enjoy!

Mark, why and how many years ago did you decide to commit to being a professional volleyball coach? What pushed you towards that decision?

I decided to be a coach when I was 21. I really loved volleyball and couldn’t imagine doing anything else with my life. I tried studying at university but was just not interested.

I was not a great player, I didn’t want to be an administrator so the only choice left was to be a coach. If I knew now what I knew then, I don’t know if I would have made the same decision.

Matias here: ok, an open ended answer, makes the readers excited haha ...we'll get back on this, maybe during a video call?!

What advice would you give yourself as a starting coach?

Do you have a particular goal as a coach? Maybe a goal that you already reached or a goal that is so hard to reach that it gives you daily motivation?(and some healthy stress :-)) Can be personal on a team or club level, or all of those.

My only goal from the beginning was to be the best coach I could be. To do that I have to understand the game how it really is, not how we imagine it to. That is the background of everything I have done.

I haven’t reached my goal yet, because I never can. It is incredibly frustrating to keep moving and the end point is never closer, but that is the way it works.

The future of volleyball, how will the game evolve according to your opinion? Or what are you hoping for that the game will look like in a couple of decades? Will the speed of the game increase? Will the game become more technical?

The game will get faster, and more variable. We can already see now that the men’s game, at least, is less structured and predictable than it was only a few years ago.

That will continue. I don’t know what ‘technical’ means. If it means higher skill level and more variation, then yes. If it means less power, then no.

According to you, what rule change is necessary in the future? And why would you want to see this new rule implemented?

Most of the things that people complain about with men’s volleyball would be fixed if rotational faults were actually called as per the rules. It would restrict offence, by changing the setter position because the setter would not be able to get to the net in time, and making spiking more difficult in certain rotations, eg opposite in P2 and middles in P6.

That would take the pressure off the serve and therefore reduce service errors. I wrote about it in more detail. Longer Rallies, Same Rules – At Home On The Court (marklebedew.com)

Some restrictions in attack, for example the two handed throw is nearly always not a legal volleyball contact. It should be outlawed tomorrow.

Why not ask a silly question also. So, you are Dr. Frankenstein and have the ability to put together the world's most performing volleyball player. Which at least 5 characteristics would he/she have.

Not in any order: size – there is a net, big is good; power – you don’t have to use it all the time, but you have to have it; athleticism – fast and dynamic; creative – to see solutions to game problems in real time; competitive – really competitive, not just the impression of competitive, but walking into the gym every day with the goal to win everything that day. Ultimately there are less of players with that quality than any of the others.

Best game you've ever seen. Very simple, what recent or game from the volleyball vaults did validate once more that volleyball is the greatest sport on the globe (for all of us). For sure share your opinions about this matchup, what you took away from it.

At this point I have been lucky enough to see a lot of great matches. The ones that have the greatest impact are the ones that you see when you are young and impressionable.

So, the most impactful games for me were a match at the 1986 World Championships Qualification tournament between Italy and Canada that I saw live when I was 19. It was my introduction to really high level volleyball. 1986 World Promotional Championships – At Home On The Court (marklebedew.com).

The second match was one that I saw on video, the 1985 World Cup match between USA and USSR. I grew up on stories of the Soviet team, but had never actually seen any of them play in any context.

The story of the game is well known. It was an amazing match, all of the greatest players of the 80s, close to their peaks, on the court at the same time. Greatest Volleyball Match Of All Time – Part Two – At Home On The Court (marklebedew.com)

Matias again; I'm taking some steps to keep on delivering the same coaches' insights on volleybrains.com as you're reading right now, but am also venturing out into the tactical and technical development part of our game. Related to that...

On Mark's website you can find this screenshot from the scouting report of the above mentioned game. Compare it to a recent match report of your own team and check out the low amount of serve errors (of course) and the crazy amount of total spikes (logical)

When preparing a new game (next weekend), how does your general approach look like and did you ever change your approach? Why did you change and was the outcome beneficial?

I am always changing how I prepare and think about game preparation. A lot of coaches, especially when they are starting out, think it is important to show everything they know to the players, to prove themselves in a sense.

The key thing is to find the single thing that will do the most to help your team win and that is the thing to focus on. It will be different for each opponent.

What is an unusual habit or an absurd thing that you love?

Other than devoting most of my waking hours to perfecting a process for getting six guys to make a ball bounce over a net into an 81m2 area past six other guys wearing different coloured shirts for the amusement of bystanders?

That seems like the most absurd thing in my, or anyone else’s, life.

How has a failure, or apparent failure, set you up for later success? Do you have a “favorite failure” of yours?

To borrow the famous line from Michael Jordan I have failed many, many times.

Individual matches, small ones, big ones, practices that didn’t work, meetings that didn’t resolve the problem, jobs that ended prematurely. All of them created moments of reflection and learning. I honestly can’t recall a favourite, or significant.

Perhaps the most significant change I made was not the result of failure, but the moment that I realised I was not enjoying the day to day work because I was not being myself. At that point I resolved to change my approach and basically to relax. It made a huge difference.

If you can make the strongest 'starting six' in the world, right now. What would your team look like? Why did you choose these players?

This is an impossible task. I can’t imagine leaving some players out, but I would have to.

And the strongest team would be different from my favourite. There are some guys that I love to watch play just for my own pleasure. Guys like Bruno, Giannelli, Kwolek, N’Gapeth, Juantorena, Perry, Kochanowski, Wallace, Anderson, Lisinac, Nimir are a few of them.

Do you have a book that you like a lot? Which lessons did you get out of it?

One book that influenced me a lot in my approach to life is Zen and the Art of Motorcycle Maintenance by Robert Pirsig.

For coaching, the one I always come back to is Sacred Hoops by Phil Jackson and Hugh Delehanty.

And after that either of the Volleyball Coaching Wizards books 😉

What is one of the best or most worthwhile investments you’ve ever made?

Time in my family.

What advice would you give to a smart, driven young coach about to enter the “professional coaching world”?

Question everything and go your own way.

A follow up to the last question. Maybe even more important, what advice should they ignore? What are bad recommendations you hear about coaching or training volleyball?

The worst advice I hear is that you have to practice more.

Volleyballers do far too much practice, especially practice that has no purpose.

The second worse thing I hear is that every tiny detail is important. No, they’re not. Some things are important. Some things are not. If you’re a good coach you can tell the difference.

Is there a rule change that you want to see turned back? Why is that?

I don’t think agree with the thinking, but a lot of people complain about the service errors in men’s volleyball. I actually like the overhand reception rule, but there is a case that changing that rule back would have the biggest impact on service errors of any possible rule change because it would encourage float serving.

If you could have a gigantic billboard anywhere with anything on it — metaphorically speaking, getting a message out to every athlete or coach on the globe — what would it say and why?

My quote would be “Ignore quotes. Especially those on billboards. Life is full of far more nuance than fits on a meme.”

touché :-)

In the last five years, what new belief, behaviour, or habit has most improved your life?

My son growing up, and making myself relax.

When you feel overwhelmed or unfocused, or have lost your focus temporarily, what do you do?

I remind myself of why I love volleyball. Never forget that.

Thanks for your insights, Mark.

If you, the reader, feels the need to contact me or has any input. (stuff you want to see covered, questions to coaches, ...)

Feel free to leave a message over here.

Enjoy your day!



