===== SESSION: https://volleybrains.com/erin-virtue/ =====

----- VIDEOS -----
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=imqkexmalJc
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nyQoPwNQfXs
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZjaI620f2cY
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=62avWIbXTek
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HvRgKTjaXcM
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pEpJw7fHzPM
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VRfMCKw21tE
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=u_UzKqM2FmE
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fE9WcKhdFUk
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Ze1B4PQqwYA
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bJHABsWXoQ0
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oV7sCmzV4Ok
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=unwzsZ-881U
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kS6mz1lMXNw
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KsYHXWKh0Ak
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zttWBCQCs-g
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=x0LbkktIx6E

----- TEXTO -----
93. Erin Virtue: Each recipe for success is going to be unique.

Erin Virtue is the head coach of the University of Michigan’s volleyball team and a former gold medal winning U.S. National Team assistant.

As a standout setter at the University of Illinois from 2001 to 2004, coach Virtue earned All-Big Ten and AVCA Honorable Mention All-American honors in 2003, and lead the Fighting Illini to three NCAA Tournament appearances.

Transitioning into coaching, Erin began at Loyola University Chicago in 2006 before serving as an assistant coach at the University of Cincinnati (2007–2010) and the University of Michigan (2011–2015). And took on the role of associate head coach at Northwestern University in 2016.

Erin's assistant coach position with the U.S. Women's National Volleyball Team, contributed to a gold medal at the 2021 Tokyo Olympics. In January 2023, Erin returned to Michigan as their head coach, bringing her extensive international experience to the Wolverines.

In this thoughtful and inspiring conversation, Erin shares the experiences and ideas that have shaped her journey.

Key takeaways from this article include:

Development pillars: Craft, Mind, Team, Body, and Heart guide programming.

Create intentional moments to decompress to prevent coaching burnout.

When overwhelmed, focus on taking concrete actions rather than dwelling.

Having a strong purpose helps endure difficulties in pursuit of excellence.The value of staying curious and learning from people around you

Learn a simple but powerful framework for athlete development—on and off the court

The role of strong communication and shared values in building a staff

Insights into how top-level players "read the game" and why that matters

Thoughts on where the sport is heading, and how to help players prepare for it

We have 58 minutes of video interview (divided over 15 clips) with coach Virtue in this article. Enjoy!

Enter Erin...

Erin, why did you decide to commit to being a fulltime volleyball coach? What pushed you towards that decision?

I think about this a lot, and people often ask me, "Where did you get your start? What made you decide to coach?"

For me, it all started with a massive amount of adversity—probably not an uncommon story.

I was playing at the University of Illinois, and in my senior year, we were rolling. Everything was coming together. And then, I tore my knee. I was the senior captain, and I took so much pride in what we had built. We were in the middle of rebuilding that program, and suddenly, my season was over.

It was a tough blow—you never want to get hurt, and it felt like such a disappointing way for my college career to end.

But looking back, it actually gave me a really cool opportunity to impact the team in a different way.

Instead of being on the court, I had to figure out how to contribute from the sidelines.

I asked myself, How can I still be a good teammate? We had a freshman setter stepping in, so I focused on supporting her, helping the attack, and just being there for the team however I could.

At the same time, I wasn’t done playing. I rehabbed hard and had really enjoyed that new feeling of being part of something without being on court.

Eventually I had the opportunity to train with the national team under Jenny Lang Ping. I had a choice—play in Italy or train in Colorado with Team USA. For me, the decision was easy. Italy was an incredible opportunity, but it was in the middle of their season, which meant a lot of matches and less focus on training. What I really wanted was to learn—to get better, to soak up knowledge.

I just wanted to train with a coach like Jenny. She was such a great player for China, and I took every chance to ask her questions, to learn from her, to pick her brain. I was a good enough player to be in that gym, but I could already see that my future probably wasn’t with knee pads on.

So I made the shift. I left playing behind and decided to pursue coaching and teaching. I even went back to school to study how to be a better teacher and coach.

It’s funny—coaching wasn’t my plan. It wasn’t something I chose at first. But in a weird way, I’m really grateful for that injury. It sidelined me from playing, but it put me on a path I didn’t even know I wanted to be on.

What advice would you give yourself as a starting coach? An advice that is so clear and logic for you now, but that you had to develop over the years.

I think that the two main things I would think about is: one, just be thirsty. Ask questions. Be around people that are smarter than you.

And I had a wonderful chance to be around a lot of really good people, and I think my young self was shy. I still don't think I know it all, by any means. I have so much to learn. But for me, to put myself in a really uncomfortable place where I'm asking something questions, or seeking clarity —just being thirsty—would definitely be advice I’d give myself.

And then with that and I think this is a place young coaches stumble sometimes—is: stay authentic.

I think there are so many coaches—you’ve gotten an opportunity to interview some amazing people—and by the time they’re in the twilight of their career, I think they really know who they are.

But that takes a while for a young person to shape and figure out—who they are, and how can they bring their authentic self to what they’re doing. And that certainly took me some time, for sure.

I would see really great coaches, or coaches I looked up to, and then I would maybe gravitate toward that area, or that personality.

You know, some basketball coaches watch Bobby Knight from Indiana, and he has a very unique style of coaching. But there's only one Bobby Knight. And he has this specific style. There’s only one Russ Rose. They’re very unique individuals.

And I think that young coaches—and certainly as I was younger—I wish I would've learned that sooner, of just: I can just be me, and try to continually find the best version of me.

Matias: I think that there's a lot of things in there. Advising yourself to be more authentic is difficult, because young Erin doesn’t know of course. She doesn’t know how to be authentic.

But then—she can be open to learn. Just be there. Be open to learn. Your being authentic will come faster in that way.

Yeah. And I think high performers—and I certainly, in everything I've always wanted to be great at something since I was a little kid. Even if it was just eating dinner faster than my brother or something, you know? I was always trying to be good at something.

And I think that comes with having this relationship with failure, or embarrassment, or lack of knowing something. When you're authentic, or when you're trying to stay thirsty, that means you're seeking clarity.

And we teach that to our athletes now: we're gonna mess up, and that’s how we grow and get better.

And I think young coaches, like young athletes, have that same fear. And maybe it’s not as big as for other things in life; but it’s there. It’s present.

You have to be able to let go of that if you want to be great.

What are bad recommendations you hear about coaching or training volleyball?

The first thing that comes to mind when I think of kind of a bad recommendation—or just a school of thought that I don’t agree with—is language that is very finite.

Like, “You must do this to be great,” or “Everyone who’s good is training only this way.”

I really just believe that each recipe for success is going to be unique.

There are some principles—there are pieces in motor learning, in how we learn, whether that’s on the court or in the classroom—and there are definitely some scientifically proven things that are real and grounded.

But there are so many pieces to who we are as people, and to the people we’re working with, that make things really unique. And coaching is kind of like a river—you’re never going to step in the same river twice, because it’s always moving. There are just so many components that go into that.

So language that I usually have an issue with—or try to stay away from—is anything that feels finite in its nature. To me, that’s not moving forward. That’s just looking backward and only trying to copy the recipe that worked for someone else.

Well, at Michigan, maybe that’s not the recipe we need to be great here. So, I try to learn from other people, but also make it our own.

There are a million examples of that, but I guess, as a general area, that’s one I would definitely throw some caution at.

Do you have a particular goal? Maybe a goal that you already reached or a goal that is so hard to reach that it gives you daily motivation?

Well, first of all—I love what I do.

Right now, I’m the head coach at the University of Michigan. I’m working with this program and this incredible staff. I’ve had the opportunity to work with our national team. And there’s so much time, effort, and just energy that’s put into what we do as coaches.

And I think probably everyone that you’ve interviewed has some version of just… love for what they’re doing.

Because we pour into it—more than some other occupations. Friends of mine, or siblings, or family members—they’re like, “Man, you are just… it’s all around you.”

And that’s love.

And I think for some people—they’re an accountant, and then they go home and they’re not an accountant anymore. That’s not my life.

And that helps me come to terms with it—yeah, it’s just all around me, no matter where I am in the world.

As far as my goals, for the program here at Michigan. There was a really famous coach we had here for football, Bo Schembechler. Back in the 1960s, he started a phrase: “Those who stay will be champions.”

I’m going into my third season at Michigan, and I want to stay. I want to see what we can do here. I want my players to come, and stay, and develop, and grow—and be a champion here.

And that can look a lot of different ways. But certainly, performance-wise, we’ll be chasing championships—no question.

But I want my athletes to leave and be champions in whatever they choose to be. There are so many pieces to that. But I think about that phrase a ton, and how it relates to why I’m pouring so much into this place.

Because I believe in that. And I believe that it can be done here. And in the kind of revolving door that is athletics at times, I really want to bring in staff and players who want to achieve that goal—together.

Team culture. Do you have any methods that you reach back to every new season? It's a big question, but you can take your answer wherever you want to take it.

I think it’s a really important question. And when you talk about culture, it immediately gets very big, because the culture of your program is in everything that you do.

It’s in everyone who’s part of it. It’s the athletes, the coaches, the support staff, the alumni, the prospective student-athletes, the recruits, the parents, even everyone who comes to camp.

It is just around you. It’s how you show up every day.

In every conversation we have, whether we’re saying, “Okay, this is going to be a culture meeting,” (and sometimes we do have those)—but every meeting is about culture, because it’s who we are. It’s embedded in everything we do.

A big part of building culture for me was being able to bring in people that I felt really aligned with. Especially the staff I have right now—bringing people in, onboarding them, getting them to know what I believe, having those conversations ahead of time.

So when my assistant is meeting with an athlete, or a parent, or a recruit, it’s as if I’m in the room. We’re all speaking the same kind of language.

Here at Michigan Athletics in general—our vision, one of the things in our fight song—is to be the leaders and the best. That’s the vision that my boss has set for this whole department.

So I need to develop leaders. Leaders within my athletes, leaders within my staff.

Knowing my staff’s goals—do they want to go be a head coach? What do they want out of their career? Can we develop them for that?

Certainly, we’re developing our athletes to lead. So when they eventually leave Michigan—whether it’s to play professionally, for their national teams, or to go be a doctor, or a lawyer, or a teacher, or a mom, or whatever they’re going to do next—I want them to be leaders in that space.

We take a lot of value in that.

Another piece—this is something I absolutely worked on with USA Volleyball, especially the National Team Development Program. When I was coaching with Karch and the Women’s National Team, I was also the director of the National Team Development Program. That included all the underage national teams: boys, girls, beach, indoor.

We wanted to come up with a really common language of development. What that looked like was, we created development pillars.

And that is:

Craft – Your technical and tactical pieces, which most people talk about when they think about getting better at volleyball. Working on setting, or tactical pieces, or scouting reports.

Mind – Mental performance, and how to maximize that in our game and in ourselves.

Team – What it means to be a great teammate. How do we be part of a team? How do we develop great teammates?

Body – Strength and conditioning, nutrition, sleep… just so many pieces of how we recover and take care of ourselves. Especially teaching young athletes how to be great in that space.

Heart – This, to me, is one of the most unique things. When I studied professional groups across the country—and in the UK, the Lawn Tennis Association—they talk about the heart of the athlete. It’s often considered intangible: your effort, your attitude—who you are. Some people might see it as energy, or bringing your self into the space to get better.

We talk about all of these pillars in our program here at Michigan.

It’s embedded in me from my time with USA Volleyball. And culturally, those pillars are everywhere.

For example, we’re in practice and working on our passing seams—well, there’s immediately some team involved in that. There’s craft, obviously. But also elements of heart, and definitely body as we prepared ourselves for that practice.

That’s where culture becomes all around you—the more you talk through things.

Another big thing in our culture—maybe less spoken about but really important to me as a head coach—is: I’m in it with them.

It’s not Erin over here and everyone else down there. I’m in it with our players. I want to be in it with my staff. I want to work together. That was a big lesson I learned working with the greatest players in the country on the national team.

My first summer with the national team, I got to work with Foluke Akinradewo—one of the best middles in the world at that time.

Trying to help her get better—it was a collaboration. I was asking her questions, just as much as she was asking me. We were trying to do a great thing. At that point, we were chasing a gold medal that USA had never won. And we were all in it together.

And here at Michigan, we’re chasing something cool too.

I want to be 'in it' with my players.

Yes, I’ve had more experience than them in this game. But they know themselves. They have more experience with themselves than I do. So if I can be in it with my team, I think we’re going to get farther.

I hope that’s something they feel every day. That’s how I want to approach things.

And we’re going to do that with a lot of grace. I’m not someone who’s going to have every answer. If I don’t know something, I’ll study it—or go find someone who’s better at supporting in that area than me.

I’m going to do it with a ton of gratitude—really grateful for the people I get to bring in and work with every day. For the staff that grinds and grits it out with me.

And I want to be one of the hardest-working programs in the country—and the hardest-working coach. That’s what I try to be. I’m just going to try to grit it out.

That’s one controllable I have in a conference—and in a country—where volleyball is exploding in a great way. So culturally, it’s gotta be in you. It’s got to be how you present yourself every day.

And I try to live that, and be a good model for my team and my staff.

Matias: I think an important thing—or something that really resonated with me, you have a staff, and they have different goals.

Staying with the program, being there for one year and go and coach a lower level team...whichever many options there are. But this kind of radical candor or transparency that you have—I think that is essential. If you can create that as a head coach, it’s so crucial—not only for your success, but for theirs too.

Like you just said: if I’m not there in a conversation with an athlete, but one of my assistants is, I’m sure they’re saying the same thing I would’ve said. And to have developed that in just a short while is wonderful. You don’t develop that kind of connection or alignment that quickly—unless you’re constantly encouraging this reality.

I think when you build a staff, and last year, we got to bring in, three new staff members. So on my staff that I work with every day—including the strength coach and the dietitian, who are also working with us throughout the season—we’ve got assistant coaches, a performance analyst, and operations.

That’s five people—and with myself, it’s six.

So the six of us are just… we’re the volleyball staff. And we’re constantly having conversations.

I like to be surrounded by people who think differently than me—but generally, we’re aligned in how we want to tackle those conversations.

So when we have differing opinions, there’s good listening happening, good collaboration, and we’re able to come to a really solid solution—before we go out to practice. We know we’re going to mess up sometimes, and then we come back and talk through it.

"Okay, how do we make that a little bit better? More efficient? How can this person help in this space? Or be more informed for an activity we’ll do at practice?"

I also want to have a staff of diverse thought, especially because I have a team of diverse thought. And in a way, what I say—or how I say it—might not resonate with an athlete.

But maybe how Kassie, or Nick, or Bjarne says it—that does resonate. And that’s the goal: so we can transfer it to the game. So having lots of different voices, but all of us rowing the same boat—that’s really big when it comes to staff.

Team rules. Are there some fixed rules that you put in place? Technical/volleyball-related and organizational.

In the NCAA, you know, we’re guided by different compliance rules. And within the program, we’re definitely going to have some guiding principles.

One example is: we strive to have clear and transparent communication.

That could be from me to an athlete, or an athlete to me. For example, on role clarity, if someone wants more clarity on why they didn’t start that match—that’s one of my biggest responsibilities: making sure we have understanding around roles.

But on the other side of that, if an athlete is confused, or wants clarity, or doesn’t agree, or wants to talk something through—that has to be a conversation we have.

I can’t read minds—no one can. So we need to talk about: Where are we? Where do we need more clarity?

That applies from me to my staff, from the staff to the team, through the leadership committee—it all comes back to clear and transparent communication.

And yes, of course that translates to the court. But transparency also means we need to cut some filters out so we can be really, really clear—and really efficient—with what we do.

Another guiding principle we have is: relentlessly pursuing better. That has to be every day, from everybody. We have to be fully bought in as a program—from our athletic trainer to our student managers. Everyone asking: How are we getting better?

Now, for some who maybe aren’t in that phase of their life yet—who aren’t quite in pursuit of mastery—that can feel exhausting. So we have to be clear about what we’re committed to. We’ll talk about it a lot.

Maybe they’ve had a tough day. They’ve got an econ exam. Class was rough. But when we walk in—now it’s volleyball time. We have to improve. We have to find a way to chip away.

We talk about that constantly.

And, like I said, we have some general rules—more than just principles—but one of the biggest for me is: be on time. That’s a big one. And honestly, it’s just out of respect.

There’s a lot to get done—especially on a college campus. The schedule is tight: we’ve got to get from weights, to practice, to class, to study hall, to team meals, career events... all sorts of stuff. They get pulled in a million directions.

So how we respect each other’s time—that’s huge. And that goes for everybody. I think that goes back to my dad, being in the Navy, and how I grew up. That one stuck with me.

I’m always going to try to be really efficient with time—how we move through training, how we get things done. And I expect that same respect in return from the people I’m working with.

The future of volleyball, from a technical point of view, how will the game evolve according to your opinion? What is needed to get there?

There are a few things where you see trends between the women’s and men’s game, and honestly, I think they can be a lot more similar than we often make them out to be. Some of the limits we see in the women’s game are actually limits we’ve put there ourselves.

So when we look at women’s volleyball—especially the offensive side of the game—I think there’s a growing level of creativity, particularly in the routes.

It used to be that if you thought of the court from the endline to the net as a north–south direction, most of the routes were strictly north–south. But now, we’re starting to see more east–west movement, drifting, and creative patterns that are making blockers’ lives tougher.

And that’s important because blocking has gotten much better across the world—and definitely in the United States.

Athletes have better vision, and I think more coaches are teaching attackers to use the edges, to find angles. So how we move, and the routes we run—that’s something that’s definitely happening, and I think it’s only going to grow.

You’re also starting to see—in some areas, not everywhere—a lot more variety in serving. It’s not just topspin or float anymore. There are serves coming from different spots on the court, with different techniques. Players are figuring out better ways to manipulate the ball—whatever type of ball they’re using.

In the U.S., we use all different volleyballs, depending on the level or event. But that’s a space where I think there’s still a lot of potential in how we can play the game.

And the speed—you mentioned the speed—it’s really fun. I think back to when I was playing, and it was so slow. I watch it now and think, “Oh man, how were we running so slow?”

But it’s fun to watch the game now. The speed, the physicality—it’s exciting. It’s drawing fans in.

And that’s not just in the men’s and women’s game—even in high school, I’m watching young teams play and take risks with speed.

And yes, it’s risky—there will be more mistakes. But it’s cool to see young athletes not just playing safe, but trying to play the game in new ways.

Probably a smaller, more specific thing—but within the NCAA, one change I really hope to see (and I’m sure I’m not the first coach to say this) is for Division I to better align with what we’re seeing at the cutting edge of the sport—at the Olympic, national team, and FIVB level.

That includes rules, but also match management and technology.

For example—having video delay available on the bench. That’s not an expensive upgrade, and it’s something I got really used to while coaching in Paris. Then I came back to coach in the Big Ten—and we can’t use that tool.

So, I really hope the NCAA catches up in that space.

Another example is allowing players to stay in the game more, rather than subbing them out so often. There are just certain elements that I think—if we can align with the international level more quickly—it will help all of volleyball here in the U.S.

With the growth of our pro leagues, and hopefully continued momentum in that space, it would better prepare college athletes for the next level.

So, yeah—those are just a couple pieces. Nothing super unique to me, probably, but I’d love to see us be better soldiers in that space, within the NCAA, than we have been.

Matias: And now you have this great incentive also, with all the leagues in the US, to invest in six rotation players. That's something to think about. For me as a European going from watching a top European game to a top D1 game, it's still weird every single time. Oh, yeah. These kids with different jerseys can serve and all those subs happen all of the time.

I guess to get athletes to the National team gym for the first time also really is about teaching them about the international game?

There were certain things we had to train athletes to do just because of the rules that apply at that level.

Coming from college, one big adjustment was middle serving. That’s not a rule per se, it’s more of a developmental choice made by the programs they came from. But it’s absolutely something we can control and train.

The second thing—this one is a rule, and it’s specific to women’s college volleyball—is the pursuit rule around the antenna or the pole. In some smaller gyms, there might be safety concerns, which is understandable. But in men's Division I, we are allowed to pursue the ball around the antenna, even though we're often sharing the same venues with the women. So, I’d really love to see that restriction removed—unless there’s a safety reason.

It’s definitely tough to teach, but at Michigan, we do allow it in training. Yeah, they might get called for it in a match, but we're still going to train it. My hope is that we can all get on the same page a bit faster as we continue to push the envelope with what our game can do. Because those are the most excited plays for fans to watch.

And beyond that, the way we manage the game—especially with technology—has huge potential. I know there are costs involved, but things like the challenge system and just the overall flow of the game are important.

I’m excited to see where volleyball is heading.

Even just comparing the last Olympics to Tokyo—the pace was much faster. We had better technology, no need to challenge line calls, and the R1 could make quicker decisions. That meant fewer delays, more focus on the game itself, and a better experience for fans.

For volleyball to keep growing, especially with TV and fan engagement, we need to streamline that part. Nobody wants to sit and watch a one-minute challenge review. If we can make a call in a few seconds and move on.

You’ve had the unique experience of preparing national team players who spend most of the year playing all over the world. How do you take the lessons those athletes bring back and use them in the USA gym.

Technically, and you could pick any part of the game you want. Certainly, my job with the national team was studying our offense and our setting. And that wasn’t just studying our team, but also looking at how the best teams in the world were doing it.

Some parts of the game are going to be similar, but there are also a lot of things that are unique to the individual, to the country they come from, or to their style of play.

One thing I really liked was when our athletes came back from overseas—whether they were playing in Italy, Brazil, Japan, China—wherever. Now, with the league in the States, they still have different coaches, but hopefully they’re learning something, and then being able to adapt it.

Of course, at USA, we had to have a system. The players had to fit into it so we could get all these different athletes competing together as one heartbeat.

To be able to work with all this new input, that was a really fun challenge. You had some of the best players in the world being trained for nine months with a club or pro team, and then we’d bring them back. Maybe we had a week or two to prepare for VNL, and then a little longer for World Championships.

One of the biggest things we tried to impact was how they could take certain techniques they've picked up, be really efficient with how they move, could we read the game at a really, really high level.

Because the most elite athletes I’ve been around read the game at an amazing level.

That was definitely one of the things Karch did best—both as a player and now in how he teaches. He’s always asking questions like, “What did you see?” and “Why?” Always looking, always studying. The key is learning how to put yourself in a position to read the game. That’s the controllable. What are you looking at? What are you looking for? Are you asking questions? Are you watching video? That goes for both coaches and athletes.

For young coaches who haven’t developed that elite skill yet, the question becomes: can you help players get into better positions so they can begin to read? To create possibilities to have the ability to read what you should be reading.

One example is with setters. It’s something I didn’t train much myself when I was younger, and I don’t see it taught often when I’m out watching younger players being coached. Even in first ball—off serve receive—it’s about how they move to the net. Like in rotation one: how do we get to the net? Do we have great vision of the passer? Are we facing them? Are our eyes on the platform? What are we looking for so that we can make a great move to the ball off the pass?

You see incredible athletes do this. You watch Micah Christenson or Jordyn Poulter—our starting setters for USA Men and Women. You watch Asia Wolosz. These great setters all have incredible movement to the ball.

Their in-system range is massive, and it’s because they’re really efficient movers. That has everything to do with their reading.

But the bigger question is: what are they doing before they have to read?

That’s where the real study comes in. What type of approach are they using before they read the blocker in front of them? What are they doing to put themselves in a great position to see the play unfold? For passers, it’s about asking: what are we looking at? What cues can we take from a server’s hand contact, their approach, or their toss to give ourselves an advantage in reading the serve?

There are definitely technical components to that as we learn to read the game at a higher and higher level. But for me, that’s been the really fun part of working with elite players over the last eight years—taking what they know and bringing that to younger players at the college level. Then working on the controllables to help them get better at reading.

Because reading the game—it’s a skill that takes a lot of time. It takes reps. It takes seeing the game over and over again for years.

Best game you've ever seen. What recent or game from the volleyball vaults did validate once more that volleyball is the greatest sport on the globe.

If I’m thinking about our best game at the Olympics, it was probably the semifinal: USA vs. Brazil at the Paris Olympics.

USA won. Tight, amazing match.

Brazil is a team that we, USA, often match up with. We play a similar style of volleyball, so it’s always a really fun opponent for us. The systems are similar enough that it can really go either way, and that’s exactly how it feels when you’re coaching it. I think it probably feels the same way for the players, too.

Coaching against Zé Roberto and his staff—there was just a ton of respect. Leading up to Paris, Brazil had actually been playing better volleyball than we had. So going into that semifinal, we were a bit of an underdog—definitely in that tournament overall.

But winning that match gave us a chance to play for a gold medal, and that’s just… it’s an unreal feeling.

When you’re preparing to play a team and an opponent that you deeply respect, it adds something special to the process. I think we had a really good game plan going into that match, but then it’s really about how you play once you’re there.

How do you manage the flow of the game? What do we do with subs? Adjustments?

We had a ton of respect for what Zé has done with that program, and it was just a great match all around. Honestly, I haven’t given myself a lot of time to reflect on Paris because I jumped right into everything happening at Michigan. But that match—that was a huge feat for our team.

And I just remember… the waterworks. There wasn’t a dry eye among anyone wearing a United States flag that day.

If you could have a gigantic billboard anywhere with anything on it — metaphorically speaking, getting a message out to every athlete on the globe — what would it say and why?

There’s one sign I have in my office—and I think it’s actually a quote from Michelangelo. You could probably find a version of it from anyone, really—but the quote just says, “I’m still learning.”

And that’s all the sign says. I’m looking at it right now.

It doesn’t have to come from Erin Virtue—it could come from someone in any country, from any walk of life. But the point is really just to encourage athletes and coaches to keep learning.

And I think if we enter a space with that mindset—the game’s going to get better. The athletes will get better. Coaches will grow. We’ll just lift each other up.

So for me, that message is a huge one. In some form or another, I’d always want to have that around. That’s the sign I like to look at: “I’m still learning.” It sits right next to my books.

I love reading. It inspires me daily.

What is an unusual habit or an absurd thing that you love?

I’m sure there are a lot of things—I think we all have them.

A part of me, especially over the last eight years, has just been... working. A lot. I’ve basically been working two jobs. The last two years, I was at Michigan, coaching with USA Volleyball, and also working with the National Team Development Program as an assistant coach for the national team.

So yeah—I’ve just been busy. Constantly working.

Because of that, I’m always looking for efficiencies and different ways to be more organized, especially in my work life. I’m always asking myself: How do I reshape something? How can I make this more streamlined?

And honestly, if you’re working with me or if you’re a close friend, you probably already know—I’m constantly changing things.

Like, “Oh, I like this app for my calendar,” or, “I’m using this tool for practice planning,” or, “I’m designing this in a different way now,” or, “I read something new that shifted how I approach this.”

I’m always reshaping how I operate, just as a person trying to organize the many balls I have in the air.

And with Karch, we’re always chatting about this kind of stuff. Like, “Hey, what are you using these days for practice planning?” Not even what’s in the plan—but what’s the method? What’s the best way to get it out to the court? How are you keeping your staff on the same page efficiently?

That’s something I really enjoy. It’s not necessarily unique—I think a lot of people are doing it—but I do notice it about myself. It’s something that’s always changing for me.

Let’s see... oh, I am always using erasable pens. Because I make a lot of mistakes—and I do not like writing with regular pens. Erasable pens are my go-to. And every time we went to Japan—which was almost yearly—I’d stock up. I’d go to the stationery stores and buy all the pens, notebooks, things to jot stuff down.

Japan has the best pens. A little bit in Thailand too—but Japan is the king of stationery, pens, and everything to keep you organized.

So yeah, that’s definitely something that’s always on my brain.

How has a failure, or apparent failure, set you up for later success? Do you have a “favorite failure” of yours?

Honestly, two moments come to mind in very different ways.

The first one I’ve mentioned before—it’s not really a failure, but when I had a big injury as a player, it was definitely a moment of feeling sorry for myself. I was bummed out. A lot of emotions come up in a time like that. I was 21 years old, and I had to really try to reframe what was happening. I had to believe there was more ahead—that this wasn’t the end of the story—and work through it, work back to health.

What’s interesting about my college and national team playing career is that my roles were all over the map—and in a good way. I was the injured player. I was the starter. I was the captain. I was on the bench. I was a serving sub. I was the “I’m lucky just to be here” player. I lived every possible role.

And in those moments, when I didn’t get the role I wanted, that could have looked like failure. But looking back on that time, especially college and the years just after, that experience has made me so much better at certain coaching conversations.

The empathy I have when I talk to an athlete who might not be playing—but adds so much to our training, to our team—that’s real. I’ve been in their shoes. I’ve lived the season-ending injury. I've been the captain, the senior, the rookie.

As a coach, those experiences have really helped shape how I handle role clarity conversations. Not every coach has been an athlete, but for me, my playing career gave me the ability to approach those moments with true understanding.

The second moment that stands out is from the 2018 World Championships. We finished fifth with the national team. We just missed the podium, and honestly, it wasn’t a great tournament for us. We didn’t compete well.

At that time, I wasn’t actually at the event—I was working with a college team, and Marv Dunphy was there in my place. Leading up to the tournament, I’d been part of training, at VNL, and working closely with the team. I really believed I had helped prepare our setters well. They were amazing athletes—still are—but in reflecting afterward, I realized something.

I hadn’t prepared them well enough for me not to be there.

And it wasn’t a matter of thinking I was too important. These athletes are phenomenal on their own, and Marv is an unbelievable coach. But there was a little piece missing, and I had to really reflect on that.

How do you prepare athletes to go into battle when you’re not sitting beside them? Whether you’re in the stands or not in the building at all, you still have a responsibility.

I had to ask myself: Had I given them the tools to make decisions? To run a timeout? To adjust on the fly? Had I prepared them to solve problems without me—through their own instincts, through feedback from their attackers, through trusting what they see?

That reflection shaped a huge piece of my coaching in the years that followed.

By the time we reached Tokyo in 2021, that idea—of preparing athletes to not need me—had become central to my coaching philosophy.

Through 2019, 2020, and leading into the Games, I was constantly working on it. I was trying to coach myself out of the equation—getting the athletes so well prepared that they could problem-solve on their own.

And then, as we were flying to Tokyo, someone near me on the plane tested positive for COVID. I didn’t have it, but I was considered a close contact.

So I was quarantined for the beginning of training—and I had to miss the first match of my first Olympic Games. USA vs. Argentina.

Marv, who was supposed to be working with our scout, ended up taking my spot on the bench. He’s incredible. And I was mic'ed in from the hotel with our analyst.

And yet, I felt oddly okay. Because I had put strategies in place for exactly this kind of situation—even though I never thought I’d have to miss another match. That wasn’t supposed to happen again.

But it did. And we won. The team played great. There were definitely things to work on with the setters afterward, but overall, I felt like we had done the prep work.

That 2018 experience—the failure I felt—forced me to grow.

It made me ask better questions. It made me coach differently. And it made our whole staff reflect. After that event, we debriefed everything. What do we need to do better in 2019? How do we adjust heading into the Olympic qualification year?

We made changes. But for me, personally, that experience shaped a core part of who I am as a coach now. It was a big one.

Do you have a book that you like a lot? Which lessons did you get out of it?

I just love to seek information. New perspectives, new ideas.

Reading is something I really love. I usually mix it up between nonfiction—books that are going to help me grow and be better at what I love to do—and fiction, which I turn to when I need to escape into a different space. Sometimes I just need to step outside of where I currently am, and fiction allows me to do that. It lets me think more creatively, or just differently.

But one book that always comes to mind when people ask about favorites is Man’s Search for Meaning by Viktor Frankl.

That one… it’s powerful. It’s about a Holocaust survivor, and it’s a pretty hard book to read at times, emotionally. But it also brings so much insight and even joy.

I don’t often re-read books, but this is one I’ll come back to—or at least reference parts of, or revisit quotes from.

One of the biggest takeaways from that book for me is this idea that, to survive any "why," you have to know the "how."

Or really—it’s that if you understand why you’re doing something, you can bear almost any situation around it.

If things are hard, what’s your why? Why are you in that hard moment? And what’s going to get you through it?

I think we’re in the business of “hard” when we’re trying to be great at something.

Obviously, there’s no comparison to what a Holocaust survivor endured, but the message holds—if you have a strong why, it can completely shift how you experience your situation.

In the last five years, what new belief, behaviour, or habit has most improved your life?

I mean, there are a lot of things I could say here, but I’m actually going to take this in a direction that’s outside of volleyball—just in a more personal way.

The last five, ten years… really, I’m always busy. Constantly moving, doing a lot of things. So something I’ve made a very conscious decision to do is find these little pockets of time where I can just stand still.

Like I mentioned in a different question—I’ll choose to read a book, and not one that’s going to help me be a better volleyball coach. I’ll pick a piece of fiction, something that transports me somewhere else. It might spark creativity in some new way, or just open me up to a different kind of thinking.

But more than anything, it allows me to slow down—to maybe even shut off a little bit. Having those moments to pull back has been really good for me.

I kind of think of it like shooting an arrow: you have to pull back before you can launch forward.

I’ve really learned that about myself. When you’re constantly going, going, going—it’s easy to hit a wall, feel burnout, or like you’re running on fumes. And there have definitely been times when I’ve felt close to that.

So I’ve had to figure out how to pause, reflect, or just take a moment—a day, a long flight, whatever it looks like—to decompress.

And that looks different for everyone, but for me, it’s been essential. Especially when you’re trying to be the best in the world, or the best in the country, or the best in your conference. When you’re striving for that, finding those moments to step away becomes even more important.

I’m not perfect at it, but I’ve definitely learned what works for me.

One thing I do now is use my flight time differently. I’m on close to a hundred flights a year—traveling for recruiting, going to VNL events, all over the world.

Eight years ago, I would’ve been watching film on every flight. Always grinding.

But now, I save that for when I’m home, or when I’m in a better headspace to study. I use flight time to chill—to read, to watch a movie, to talk to someone, or just do something that’s not part of the grind.

And that’s been really good for me.

What is one of the best or most worthwhile investments you’ve ever made?

Well, now I’m at Michigan as the head coach, but years ago I was an assistant here. And at that time, I was also involved with USA Volleyball, working with the youth and junior national teams—U18, U20.

I was helping out, and one of the best investments I made in myself during that time came in two parts.

First, I took some time—over a spring break and again during the summer—just to go out to California and watch the national team train. I was still at Michigan, and I had a great coach here who supported me and allowed me the space to chase that dream.

So I spent my own free time just being there, watching the team.

I didn’t really know the staff all that well at the time. I knew Jamie Morrison, who was coaching, and I knew of some of the others. I wasn’t friends with Karch yet—didn’t know him well—but I just kind of showed up, watched, and chatted a little bit here and there.

And I went with a good friend of mine, so it was also just a great personal experience. We enjoyed California, and I got to watch some of the best volleyball in the world. I did that a couple of times before I actually started working with the national team.

I think I just wanted to be around better volleyball. I wanted to see coaching at the highest level. I wanted to learn.

At the same time, when I was back in Michigan, I made a conscious decision to dive into the concept of learning how to learn. I was reading a ton, super inspired, and definitely felt like all of that was connected.

I was watching a lot of videos on motor learning, just trying to absorb as much as I could. That whole stretch of time was a real pivot point for me.

Before that, I’d always been open to talking about volleyball—but I hadn’t really committed to studying something deeply. That changed around 2011 -2013.

I remember it really clearly. I’d go to this coffee shop in Ann Arbor—Zingerman’s, which is a big deal here. They have an amazing culture in their business, and I actually spent some time studying that too.

I just invested in myself. I wanted to understand how to learn, and I wanted to get better.

And when you’re around someone like Karch—if you’ve ever had the chance to hear him speak or watch him coach—you know he’s one of the greatest of all time. And yet, he’s always trying to improve.

You can’t help but be inspired when you’re around that kind of mindset.

When you feel overwhelmed or unfocused, or have lost your focus temporarily, what do you do? I feel like you already gave your answer to this question. But maybe there's something to add.

I think it’s really similar—and for me, it’s always about returning to your why.

That’s something I go back to, especially when I’m frustrated or when things aren’t going well. And that’s going to happen a lot—when you're tired, when you're unsure, when you're just feeling off.

So when I get to that place—especially when I’m overwhelmed or I’m riding a wave of emotions, whether high or low—I try to make sure there's some kind of action.

That’s just how I operate. I do better when there's movement.

Even if I'm in a meeting with my staff, and we’re venting or talking something through—like after the 2018 World Championships, where we were all pretty bummed that we didn’t perform well—I always try to ask, “Okay, what action are we actually going to take from this?”

What are we going to do with this debrief? This meeting? This feeling of frustration, disappointment, or just general overwhelm?

I try to get to that forward momentum as quickly as I can. Even if it’s just one small step forward—what’s the next thing I can do to help move through this?

Another process I use when I’m trying to solve a problem—or when I’m feeling stuck—is to literally draw it out.

I’ll grab a whiteboard, or go online, or just get pen to paper and start laying things out visually.

I’ll throw all the components down—kind of a brainstorm. Sometimes I’ll even pull people in to help me work through it. But I really like to make things visual.

That helps me get to a solution quicker.

Thank you, Erin.



