===== SESSION: https://volleybrains.com/travis-hudson/ =====

----- VIDEOS -----
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VLfEdtW9n78
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ppEU583SylU
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HlqvdBP9tLk
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=at_sdsUImVA
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MxDiWocK_DE
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CwZSqvRAop4
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bbyimk8bT1M
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6Z_LluRfb54
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1g45z0Gu0C0
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=m0v2En6qPbo
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VgatsAaEz0s
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2XF-jP1a-xo
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jc4j-WIDG-I
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nj3ljCe6E1U
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NzOvf_Nh754
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RRKr5HQ0kUw

----- TEXTO -----
99. Travis Hudson: Authentic relationships are everything.

Travis Hudson is Western Kentucky University's head volleyball coach, WKU Athletics Hall of Fame inductee, and the architect of one of college volleyball's most remarkable turnarounds.

When Travis Hudson took over WKU volleyball in 1995, he inherited one of Division I's worst programs, ranked 308th out of 326 teams.

Fast forward three decades: he is the architect behind turning WKU Volleyball into a championship-caliber team and bringing national attention to the Hilltopper program.

Coach Hudson has led WKU to an astounding 34 conference championships and 17 NCAA Tournament appearances.

He is a 12-time Conference Coach of the Year and has coached 12 Conference Players of the Year, 13 All-Americans (including four, four-time All-Americans) and 68 first team All-Conference honorees.

In this deeply personal conversation, Travis shares the philosophy and experiences that transformed a struggling program into a volleyball powerhouse while maintaining his core belief: success on the court comes from who you are off it.

Key takeaways from this article include:

Trust yourself as a young coach - learn from others but filter everything through your own authentic coaching style.

Why boringly consistent simplicity beats fancy drills and complex systems every single time.

How investing in players as humans first creates the foundation for championship performance.

The critical balance between being a great coach and great parent - and why you don't have to choose.

Why the best players embrace vulnerability and aren't afraid to look bad while learning.

How a monthly Zoom group with other coaches became his most valuable professional development tool.

The power of strategic distance - why he never watches warmups and arrives just before game time.

Understanding that coaching greatness transcends X's and O's - it's about relationships, communication, and genuine connection.

Enter Travis...

Matias Raymaekers: Do you remember the moment that you decided, "Okay, I'm going to jump into full-time coaching or professional coaching with both feet"? And what was your thought process behind becoming a full-time coach?

Travis Hudson: I do remember it. I grew up playing football and basketball, so we could talk a long time just about this piece of it because when I graduated from high school, I had never played volleyball in my life.

And at the age of 24, I became the head volleyball coach at Western Kentucky. And that's a pretty big jump in a short period of time. (full WKU video at the bottom of this Masterclass)

I did believe that I would coach – I always thought I would coach – but I thought I would end up coaching football or basketball. Volleyball was just put in front of me. When I was exposed to the game for the first time, I knew that's where my passion was going to be.

And then coaching... you know, I've always been fascinated. I've always believed that someone who can really coach could learn to coach any sport. I've always believed that.

I've always believed that anybody can learn the X's and O's of coaching a sport. But what makes a coach elite is relationships. It's the ability to communicate. It's the ability to be vulnerable, you know, and to just dive in and learn X's and O's.

That's why I think – if it was just about understanding the game, then every elite player could become an elite coach. And you notice that's not always the case.

I always felt like I had a gift to teach and to build relationships. Volleyball became that avenue.

Matias Raymaekers: If you could talk to your younger self starting out coaching, with the experience that you have right now, what is something that you would really want to tell yourself?

Travis Hudson: Trust yourself more. Don't worry as much – trust yourself more. Because, you know, one of the biggest mistakes I made when I was young as a coach is craving, wanting to be great at what I did.

I watched so many coaches around me, and obviously you learn things from every coach that you spend time around, but it's also about understanding that genuinely being who you are is a critical component to being able to coach at a high level.

I've said this many times, there are coaches that are yellers and screamers that succeed at a high level. There are coaches that are very calm and reserved that succeed at a high level.

And you just have to, I guess, understand the message but relay it within who you are.

And as a young coach, I wish I would have trusted myself a little more.

It's one of the messages I try to give to young coaches now when I talk to them: learn everything you can learn from the people around you, but run it through your filter.

Because ultimately, you know, that genuine side of it is one of the real keys to doing it at a high level.

Matias Raymaekers: Yeah, I think that translates also to what VolleyBrains is. Don't try to be everything that Travis Hudson is or that Russ Ross is. Use all these opinions and put it through your own filter.

Matias Raymaekers: Okay, today we are 2025. What are bad recommendations that you still hear about coaching volleyball that you're like, "Okay, this should already be a story of the past. This shouldn't be going around anymore"? This can be technical, this can be about culture, team play – whatever you want to talk about.

Travis Hudson: I guess the thing that popped in my mind when you asked that question is – as a young coach and as you're growing – you start learning all these different things about the game.

You start learning all these different ways to teach and all these different drills. And you know, there are hundreds and hundreds and hundreds of drills, and to be honest, in a year's time, I use about 10.

You know, there are all these fancy names for these drills and these cool ways to go about it, but at the end of the day, I think you can spread yourself out too much.

I've always believed one of the real keys is not necessarily doing more – it's being boringly, boringly consistent in the things that you do.

And that's a real foundational piece for me. I think that simplicity is a good thing, not a bad thing.

You know, many people, when they talk about what we do offensively here, they always talk about how simple our offense is. I always laugh at that – a scouting report when you're playing Western Kentucky only takes about 20 minutes to put together, but it's defending it that becomes the hard part.

And so that's the thing for me – the simplicity of it.

I think you see it as the game has evolved through the years. You see things go in and out of popularity. But at the end of the day, it's still about doing a certain few things very, very well and very, very consistently.

Matias Raymaekers: Do you have a definite goal right now in the phase of your career that you're in?

Travis Hudson: Yeah, my goals have always been the same. And they're still the same goals that motivate me, and it's kind of crazy because you think about a career of longevity – you have these big long-term goals, and I never did. I never have.

I've had the same goals that are on repeat.

First of all, my biggest goal has always been to be a great dad to my kids. One of the things that I was told early on in coaching was how much this would pull me away from my family and I would have to make choices between my family and being a coach.

And I always said the same thing: if I ever have to choose between being a great coach and being a great dad, I'm gonna choose being a great dad.

But I don't believe you do have to choose because I believe that those things feed off one another.

And so my goals are kind of similar. My goals every year is to take the team in front of me and to just maximize who they have the opportunity to be and to watch those kids develop away from the court as well.

I just had a conversation with a player two days ago who is a super driven young player in our program right now. And I told her I wanted her to spend time away from volleyball this summer, and she didn't really love my answer.

And I said, "No, you don't understand. I'm not asking you to sacrifice yourself as a volleyball player. I just want to make sure that when we're done on this journey, you define yourself as something more than just a volleyball player."

And so we spend time trying to evolve in other areas. Some people in our program have an artistic side to them. Some of them are really close to their faith. There are all these different things that make them complete, which I think make them better as a player.

And I guess one of the things that I've said over and over when people ask me about our success here is I always say we've had the success we have on the court because of who we are off it.

And to be honest, after 31 years, those are the things that are still important to me. Those are the things that motivate me year to year. You know, I've had success beyond my wildest dreams as a head coach. And so if winning a championship or going to an NCAA tournament or doing whatever was my goal as a coach, I would have already retired.

But the things that motivate me are helping the next 17-year-old kid that walks in our program. Those were my goals when I was in my 20s. And now they're my goals when I'm in my 50s. And as long as when a season ends and the next one begins, as long as I wake up motivated to help that next group of kids, then I know that I'm still meant to do this.

Because there is no destination. And that's the beautiful thing about coaching.

There's always that next kid, if you're in it for that development and that's what's always motivated me.

Matias Raymaekers: Let's dive deeper into game preparation. Did you substantially change your approach over the last few years?

Travis Hudson: Great question. I don't know where my answer comes from exactly. My younger assistant and I talk a lot about technology, and I certainly understand how much more information is available now.

But let's just say I'm dragging my feet a little bit when it comes to using it – certainly nowhere near its fullest potential.

I don't know if it's because I'm on the back end of my coaching career and I've done things a certain way for so long that I'm more hesitant to change than I should be. Or if it's rooted in my belief in what I talked about earlier – simplicity.

There's a term I use all the time, and I'm sure you've heard it: I never want our players to have "paralysis by analysis." There's so much information that can be thrown at you now.

But no matter how much information is available, the foundation of our scouting has always been understanding that you can focus on doing things well yourself, or on making your opponent do things poorly.

I've always leaned more heavily into making sure that we play well, because I think if we execute the things we do well, that gives us the best chance.

It doesn't mean we don't look at what our opponents are doing. But I'm way less into statistical analysis and way more... and again, this might be because I'm on the downhill side of this and I'm just not aware of how to use it properly – I'm open to that interpretation.

But I'm still more of a tendency person than someone who tries to break down every single rotation.

What I've found over the years with younger assistants is they'll start throwing information at me. But when I'm watching film, so many times I'm almost pointing at the screen saying, "If you'll just watch – you don't need that number to tell you that. If you watch this player attack, you'll see that they're primarily a high-line attacker in this situation," or whatever the case may be.

So I'm pushing myself to be more open-minded about it. I certainly understand – it's not that I don't think it's valid or good information or helpful. It's more that I think there's a limit to what you can have swimming around in your head and still go out there and be an athlete, do things at a high level, and play the game freely.

Here's a good analogy I give our young players all the time: Why are juniors and seniors typically better players than freshmen and sophomores? It's not because they made some massive physical jump. It's usually because the game slows down for them mentally.

They don't have to think about doing all the things you're training them to do as underclassmen. It becomes second nature, and now their mind is free to just go play the game and react and respond.

I'm always mindful of that line, and I always want our players to be able to go on the court and react and respond to the game.

So I lean more in that direction.

Matias Raymaekers: For sure in pro volleyball, it gets to be too much, you know? How much information can you actually put into your actions? And how much of that is available to you in a split second when you need to react?

Probably the experience you've built over all these years, in all those situations – especially when you're a pro player at 28-30 years old – you're probably not going to make a decision based on the scouting report you read two hours or a day before. You're probably going to make a decision based on your experience and the situation you recognize.

Travis Hudson: Exactly. And what happens when it's one of those plays that doesn't go the way the statistics said it would?

I really believe that's where a big piece of mental toughness gets developed. Because I think people who rely so heavily on that analytical side – it's helpful to them, but when it doesn't play out the way they expected...when it doesn't happen in that scenario, I feel like sometimes that's where people struggle mentally.

They get so bent out of shape because it went differently than what they were told it was going to do. Their ability to adapt and still perform at a high level gets compromised.

Matias Raymaekers: What are you hoping the game will evolve into and what is needed for that? This could be about rules, this could be about what we can add to the game, this could be about what we can take away from the game. What would you like to see more in the game? And how do you see that happening?

Travis Hudson: Good question. It's been interesting... let me answer it this way. I've been – as I told you, I have a son that's a men's volleyball player at Ohio State.

And I've been more exposed to the men's game in the last year than ever in my life. I've learned that there are certain things about the men's game that I would love to see bleed into the women's game more than they currently do.

And I think there are certain things in the women's game that are desperately needed in the men's game.

In the men's game, you know, the men's game's ability on second contact to handle the ball not as cleanly – that's something that just made it to the women's game at the college level here in the last year, where they didn't call doubles on second contacts.

It was hard for me at first, but as I've watched it play out over the last year, I think it's an incredible enhancement to our game. Because I think any rule that allows the game to continue to have more action is a positive, without compromising the integrity of the game. And I think that rule does exactly that.

I think that's been a really, really good change to the women's game.

On the men's side, from a pure spectator standpoint, I think the most desperately needed thing in the men's game is longer rallies.,I don't know if that involves raising the net or whatever it is. I honestly can't think of another enhancement that would lengthen rallies on the men's side, other than that.

But when you watch the men's game, I think the men's game is incredibly underrated. I think the men's game in person is beautiful to watch. It's amazing to watch.

I see all the things that these men are able to do that you will very rarely, if ever, see done on the women's side.

But they're so extraordinarily athletic and the speed of the game is so extraordinary. I very rarely get to sit in the stands – I've been on the sideline my whole life as a coach.

But when I sit in the stands and watch the men's game, there'll be three, four, five long rallies that break out. And there is a different feeling in the stands during those plays because of the appreciation that the fan has for what they're watching over a more extended period.

I don't know what the answer is to that. I just know that if that can be captured in the men's game – where there are more extended rallies – I think the men's game will just explode. Because it is extraordinary to watch the speed at which that game is played. It is just extraordinary.

Matias Raymaekers: Yeah, for sure. For the non-knowledgeable volleyball spectator, the point you just made about the in-person aspect – I think if you'd never seen volleyball before and you see Division I athletes, great athletes, world-class players – you see them jump, perform, react, all the things you just mentioned...

Yeah, you don't see that in a lot of sports. Athletes that are developed in all these different aspects of what it means to be an athlete.

Matias Raymaekers: Best game you've ever seen. So this is going back into the volleyball vaults, but this could also be about a game a couple weeks ago. This can be your own game, this can be some game you saw, this can be your son playing. So is there a game where you're like "this was the pinnacle of what I like to see in volleyball"?

Travis Hudson: Oh my gosh, well, this one's very selfish. What pops in my head is a game that we were a part of. When we played in the NCAA tournament, we were sent to the University of Kentucky. It was... gosh, I couldn't even tell you the year right now. It was probably almost 10 years ago.

We played University of Kentucky in the second round, and Craig Skinner – I don't know if you know Craig, the coach at Kentucky – Craig's a really good friend of mine. I have tremendous respect for him and the program that he's built there. So even though we're in the same state, I certainly consider us friends more than rivals.

But we played them there in the second round of the NCAA tournament and we were a huge underdog against them.

I think the reason why this match sticks out in my head is because throughout the course of my coaching career, usually when someone tells you, "Hey coach, I watched you guys play," it's some triumphant victory that you had.

And for me, it was a match that we ended up losing.

We played Kentucky in the second round of the NCAA tournament. We were a huge underdog. We had a young lady named Alyssa Cavanaugh who was on our team, who was a fearless outside hitter. We came out and beat Kentucky in the first two sets to take a 2-0 lead.

Then they came back and won set three, they won set four, and then they ultimately ended up winning the match 15-13, 16-14 in the fifth set.

But it was a match where – it was in their building, the place was full. We win the first two sets, and in set three, when they beat us... you know, usually you see a letdown or you start getting rattled or you really sense a change in the momentum. And I don't think any of that occurred in the match. It was just a point-for-point match throughout the entirety of it all.

And we ultimately fell. We had – I don't remember exactly, but Leah Edmond, who's an incredible player, had a swing down the line at I think 14-13. It was going out of bounds, which would have tied the game at 14-all and Alyssa Cavanaugh would have rotated back in the match for us. And our setter chose to try to play it on a ball that was probably out. Long story short, we lose the game.

But it was the most gutted I've ever been in a locker room after playing a match.

But it was also, in 31 years of... I don't know how many triumphant victories and championships and all that – it's maybe my favorite memory.

Because anyone that knows me knows that words come pretty easy to me. And I sat in that locker room with our players and I couldn't come up with a word. I literally could not come up with a word. I just sat there until Alyssa Cavanaugh, one of our players, stood up.

It was the end of her career. And she just articulated that it was the best, most special ending to a career that she could have ever had.

And for that to happen in that moment of defeat, I think was as gratifying as anything that's ever happened. Because you truly knew you had been a part of a match that was something special, and you truly knew that the kids in your jerseys had poured themselves out.

Matias Raymaekers: I'm for sure not saying that this is the best thing to do, but are there players – international players or American national team players – that you look at for a certain part of their technique to show to; inspire or help develop your own players? Is there something like that going on? Or are you like, "No, we just do what we do"?

Travis Hudson: I wouldn't answer it that way. I will only tell you this – this probably won't make your podcast, but this will maybe fascinate you a little bit.

The player that I've been exposed to with our women's national team in the last, I don't know, 15 years that I have always been fascinated with – that never even really impacted our national team in a huge way – was Lauren Carlini, the setter that played on the women's side.

The reason why I'm fascinated with her is I was fortunate enough to coach our women's collegiate national team, and we trained in Anaheim beside our national team. So I spent a week in Anaheim, which was an incredible time for me to spend with Karch and watch Karch coach and spend time talking the game with him. I could go on and on about him in ways that maybe nobody has – I'll go off on a tangent in a minute.

But the thing about Lauren Carlini that always fascinated me was I've never seen a player that was more focused and more meticulous with every touch she had on a ball, no matter what the scenario was in training. It didn't matter.

I would see her show up before everybody else and she's doing some simplistic setter technique drill, and the look of focus and the attention to detail on every single rep she took was absolutely fascinating to me.

This was not our most recent Olympic cycle – when USA won gold eight years ago – and she did not make that roster. And I actually sat down and wrote her a handwritten note because she had trained and she was with that roster for a long time.

She sent me a message back and we kind of just connected a little bit. My note was just telling her that in your moment of – in your most disappointing moment maybe in your entire career – let me tell you why you shouldn't be.

At the bottom of Kelly Sheffield's Masterclass, you can check out an older setting progression exercise between Lauren Carlini and Coach Sheffield.

Like a player – she's not the most known or accomplished, but as a pure coach, she is a player that I've always respected at the highest level because of her attention to detail and her value that she took in every opportunity to be on the court.

And then the last tangent I'll tell you, and then you can move to your next question – let me tell you this about Karch Kiraly.

I'm sure you know Karch. I'm sure you've heard a million stories about Karch Kiraly. I have an interesting lifetime of watching Karch because I've watched him evolve through being an indoor player to being an Olympic champion on the beach to becoming a coach that raised eyebrows – "Could he learn to coach?" – to winning a gold medal as an indoor coach.

My first time ever really spending time around him where we could have a conversation was that week. And I was absolutely blown away by his... I don't know what the right word is even, but like, you know, he may be the most accomplished volleyball player in the world. And he came and sat and spoke to me and would have conversations with me like he was my assistant.

He's the most open-minded, most low-ego, he is truly a lifelong learner, which is why I think he's been a chameleon and why I think he's been able to do it at the highest level in so many different veins.

Because, you know, as I told you at the beginning of our call, with young coaches, I think you have to learn to do it in your own way, but you have to be a lifelong learner.

And they were at the peak. They were getting ready to go win an Olympic gold medal. And he asked me to come to practice and I came to practice and I'm sitting back way out of the way. He sees me and he makes me come out to the court. And he said, "I want you here. I want you to watch."

So I'm standing there watching. And then, if this wasn't a little intimidating, 30 minutes later he walks around to where I am and he stops and he says, "What do you see?"

And I have a part of me that's thinking, "Why do you care what I see?" And so we get in this conversation that is a genuine conversation.

He's trying to learn. And so I'm absolutely fascinated, not with everything he's accomplished, but with his approach to the game after everything that he's done.

Matias Raymaekers: If you could have a gigantic billboard on the side of the highway – so this is a message that every single player in the world will read – what would you put on the billboard? What is something that is important to you that every player understands, gets, or at least makes an attempt at getting it?

Travis Hudson: I've never coached a great player who wasn't willing to look bad. Be vulnerable. Allow yourself to be vulnerable.

The greatest players, the best players I've ever coached – I say this to them every time – it's your biggest strength, but it's also your biggest weakness. Your biggest strength is you are determined that you're gonna get things right. You're determined that you're gonna get things right. That's your biggest strength. You can't rest until you get it perfect, okay?

But sometimes your biggest weakness is you don't want to be wrong.

A certain part of this game comes natural to great players, okay? You'd have to give me an example of someone who grew up in a sport and was awful their whole life, and then all of a sudden became the greatest in the world. There's a certain amount of athleticism and feel and all these things that go along with greatness.

Many great players grew up with it coming, in general, easier to them than the person beside them. And I think that doesn't allow them to develop that piece of them that struggles well.

And so allowing them to embrace that struggle, be vulnerable – that's to me the last step to true greatness.

Matias Raymaekers: The quirky question. Do you have an unusual habit or an absurd thing that you love? This can be pre-game, can have nothing to do with volleyball, this can be anything.

Travis Hudson: Yeah, I don't watch warmups. I actually – this one's pretty funny because it's kind of standard over here. You know, in college volleyball, first of all, warmups last an hour, which I think is absurd. I mean, how long does it take to get your body ready to compete? But usually coaches are out on the court 45 minutes, 30 minutes before the match.

And I found as a young coach – I'm a pretty confident, pretty relaxed person on the daily, but game day? Not so much. And the thing I tell everybody is it's the one time I feel like I have very little control over anything that's going on.

I would go out because that's what all coaches did. I would go out for 45 minutes or an hour before warmups and I would sit and watch our team warm up. And very often I would be so emotionally affected by how we were warming up that by the time the game started, very often I was in a bad place mentally or I was really worked up around our team.

And so I just decided there was nothing good about me being out there for warmups.

So I literally don't walk out for the first time for a match until there's about seven or eight minutes left on the clock for the first set.

Officials hate it because they like to come over and introduce themselves and do all that kind of stuff. And they often think that my assistant is the head coach and all of those things.

But – and I know this probably doesn't make me sound like the best coach in the world – but I will sit in my office or in a locker room if we're on the road or whatever. And I will watch Netflix. Anything that can keep my mind off of what's going on – that's absolutely the best.

And so when I walk out, I walk out and my mind is clear. My mind's refreshed. I like it more. Our players love it more.

They hate it when I'm out there because like I said, I get worked up. And so I guess that's my thing. I don't watch warmups and I found that it's better for me and for our team.

Matias Raymaekers: Next one is maybe the most important question of this entire call. How has a failure or an apparent failure set you up for success later on? So this is the – I like to call it the 'favorite failure' question.

Travis Hudson: This is the way I would answer it. My career has been quite a journey. When I took over – without getting too long-winded, I'll start by telling you this.

If there's one thing that I would hope that people in college women's volleyball would say about me and our program, it's that we have tremendous respect for everyone we compete against, and that I've tried to do this in a manner where respect is the word that would come out of your mouth when you're describing me or our program.

I would tell you that it was a blessing for me – we've been in the top 25 now for 10 of the last, I think, 11, 12 years here in the sport of women's volleyball, which is unheard of at a small school like we're at, because we're not in the Big Ten, we're not in the SEC. And so we've had all this success in the last 20 years of my career.

But when I took over at Western Kentucky, we had never been to an NCAA tournament here. We had never won a conference championship here.

When I took over, we were one of the worst programs in Division I volleyball. We finished – I think there were 326 programs my first year and we finished 308th. And so my first year as a head coach, we were 7 and 26.

Three years into my career, my third year we were 9 and 22. So after three years, I had a losing career record by a landslide.

But I would not trade the beginning of my career for anything because I've kind of been almost anywhere you can be in the journey. We've been one of the worst programs. We've been one of the developing programs. We've had highs of going to NCAA tournaments and being ranked in the top 25 and going to sweet 16s and doing all those things.

But I think what I've come to learn is when I was a young coach, I know people look at you in a certain way because you're not a very successful program at the time.

And what I've come to understand is that there are bad people at every level of this game. There are big egos at every level of this game, but there are also really, really phenomenal people at every level of this game. And there are really gifted, talented coaches and players at every level of this game.

And so those early failures that I had, I think really reinforced my understanding of that, which really fueled me to be a learner, a lifelong learner from everyone around me.

When I speak at a coaches clinic now, I may be speaking to a bunch of high school coaches and I may be the one standing up speaking to them at this clinic, but before and after it, I'm picking their brains about things that they do.

And so I just think the failure early in my career gave me a mindset that has not only helped me grow throughout my career, but has also helped it be more rewarding every step of the way.

Matias Raymaekers: This is the resources question. It can be books you share with your team. It can be books that you repeatedly gravitate to or just things that you're like, "Look, this is something I want to recommend to people to look into."

Travis Hudson: Yeah, the thing that pops in my head immediately is – you know, I've spoken to you a little bit about how I wanted to balance out being a great coach with being a great father and being a great human and doing those kinds of things. And that was a struggle for me throughout my career.

One of the things that I would love for young coaches to hear is that that struggle that you feel – that undoubtedly there's moments where this game can take you away from your family, take you away from other things that you love and you start feeling guilty about being in those moments and it's such a tug of war – and it was a struggle for me throughout my career.

I actually spoke at a leadership conference one time and the guy that spoke right after me at this leadership conference was a guy named Brett Ledbetter, and he has a book that's called "What Drives Winning."

And I cannot possibly recommend it enough to anyone that's in the coaching profession or any athlete that feels that tug of war about what success is, about the pressures of being successful.

It is a fascinating read to me. I just love everything that he does because it speaks to how what we say when you say you're gonna be a coach – what you would define success as – is very different than what society would define success as or your fan base would define success as.

And that is a pretty incredible tug-of-war that you reside in.

And "What Drives Winning" is a really, really great resource to kind of help you balance out, find yourself and balance out who you want to be and how you define success in your world.

Matias Raymaekers: What is one of the best or the most worthwhile investments that you ever made?

Travis Hudson: Gee, I feel like I can answer this in two different ways. And so I will. Well, these are two very different – if I can remember them both. Sometimes I start talking about one of them and I forget the other. But these are two very separate answers, okay?

The first one – the best investment, I don't know if it's what you're looking for, but it's what pops in my head. I think it's the whole key to the program we've built here. I'm telling you the best investments that I've ever made are in our players away from the game.

If you were ever here in our office area and locker room and you know my office – if you could look around here, my office is smaller than my assistant coach's office.

And at one point we started having success and they were gonna build me a bigger office over here and I refused because my office is uniquely placed in a hallway where our players have to walk past my office every day to get to our locker room.

And the times that players, you know, throughout their day will come here – and we have a rule here, no one trumps our players. I tell our players this all the time.

If you ever walk by my office and there's someone else sitting here and you need me for something, then just duck your head in and I'll excuse whoever's here and we'll deal with whatever it is you're dealing with and I'll get back to them.

And the time that I invest in them is – first of all, it's why I'm still coaching after 31 years. It's the part I love. But number two, we're in a recruiting cycle right now.

And I always laugh when I talk to recruits because I'll say, "How many phone calls have you taken?" They'll say, "I've taken 10 calls." And I'm like, "How many times have you heard the word 'family'?" Because every coach gets on and talks about what a family atmosphere they have and how much they care about players and all those things.

But then you see that they had seven transfers last year and you're like, "Well, that's not necessarily the family I want to be a part of."

When I hire a young assistant, I tell them, "Look, there's gonna be times where you'll see me sit for 45 minutes and talk to one of our players, and we won't ever mention volleyball, and you're probably gonna think that we're wasting time."

And I'm telling you, it's some of the most important time that I'll spend all day because A, it may be helping them work through something and B, you know, when it's that moment in practice or in the middle of a game where I'm pushing to get greatness out of them, it's what's going to allow me to get over the hump with them because they're going to know that all I care about is them and that this is just a part of that process.

And so that's one way I would answer it in terms of investment.

And then the other thing that I would highly encourage coaches to do. This is why, Matias, I have mad respect for what you do and what you're doing is I remember as a young coach feeling intimidated and not wanting to approach other coaches because I thought they knew more than me or they didn't want me bugging them about things or whatever.

And what I've found as I've gotten deeper and deeper into this is the vast, vast majority of coaches are such great people and crave that same interaction that you want.

And so anytime I've ever invested in people or coaches that I watch and I appreciate how they do things has always been returned to me, you know, 10 times over.

We all get so busy that we feel like we don't have time or that they're the opponent or they're my competition and we don't want to share. And I never remember coming out of one of those conversations where I didn't feel like I had become better.

Matias Raymaekers: In the last five years, is there a new belief or behavior or habit has improved your life?

Travis Hudson: That's a good question. In the last five years, is there anything?

Yes, yes. I'm gonna tell you, it's kind of piggybacking off the question we just had. I had a coaching friend of mine reach out and he wanted to start a men's specifically – no disrespect to the females that are in this profession – but a men's group of coaches.

There's about, I don't know, a half dozen of us or so. And he wanted to start a men's group that we jumped on a Zoom call at least once a month to just connect.

And that's the word he used – it was just to connect. It wasn't necessarily talking about the sport. It wasn't necessarily talking about being fathers and husbands and all that kind of stuff.

And I remember when he reached out to me about it, I was super hesitant because I already thought I had plenty to do. I didn't think I had time. How this was going to be something that I had on my calendar that I wished I didn't.

But I did it.

And it has been the best thing that I've done in the last five years of my life. It's balanced me more as a coach. It's giving me an outlet to be vulnerable. It's given me a portal to look at other coaches and see their struggles as men.

Because men aren't always the best at being vulnerable with one another. And we've built such a relationship through the years that it's allowed that.

And it's a really, really valued part of what I do as a coach now, because as head coaches, very often you're the one everyone turns to.

And it's just super rewarding to have someone that you can lean into a little bit that kind of understands the path that you've walked. It's been great. Highly recommend.

Matias Raymaekers: The very last one. When you feel overwhelmed or unfocused or you lost your focus temporarily – this can be after a loss that shouldn't be a loss or something completely different – what are activities, thought patterns, frameworks that you turn to? What is something that you do in those kind of moments?

Travis Hudson: Yeah, outside of my profession – I'm very much an outdoors person. And I have a cabin on the lake about 30 minutes from my office here.

And that's another struggle. A lot of these themes are kind of intertwining, but that's another struggle that I had earlier, younger in my career is I felt so busy that I didn't have time to go there. But anytime I ever did, I always felt like I was better when I did.

And it took me a long time to understand this.

And in fact, my assistant coaches helped me with it a lot – understanding how critical it was for me to go there and let it be quiet for a little bit.

Even if I miss an individual workout with our players on a day because I'm there, that player is going to benefit from the fact that I went there and re-centered myself way more throughout the rest of the week than if I stayed in the mental state that I was.

So I need that outdoors time for sure. When I retire, that's where you'll find me.

Thank you, Travis.

Extra resource:



