This is a group practice. One group now is to do volleyball, like we see in the video, and the other group of receiver and liberi, so outside hitter and liberi, and one libero, sorry, because the other was not present, one libero, they are in fitness. They are to do power and fitness with the physical preparator. And after we reach the group. It was one Thursday morning, so it was the practice of Thursday. Two days before the match. And here to connect already from now a little bit to what we were speaking before. We can see, I don't know if you can see clearly, but the basket, the target of the setter are all the time, never, never perpendicular, sorry, to the net, but it's all the time a little bit open. Then it's, I change also, I can open more. When I work just right. Really with the, with the setter, not, not with fitness and, and, and volley. I open also more about the exclamative ball, like we spoke before, you know, you remember, because we work with the exclamative ball with the setter. I like that the angle, the angle of the, of the target, the basket, it's more open. You know, I prefer, I prefer that if there is one ball put on the net and the setter set and the ball don't go inside, I don't care. I, I tell you honestly, I prefer that they work, there is some ball, for example, that, that there is one ball put on the net, they set and the ball don't, don't go inside, but I give less importance to this ball. I prefer that, that the setter work on the trajectory and the precision of the exclamative. Here you can see also position two, it is open, you know, you see open with one inclination around 20 degree, something like that. 20, 30 degree. Oh, this is the, this is the first. Yes, this is the, just warm up of the hands, of the setter. This is the, the exercise that I call the, the, the training, binari. I don't know how it's in, in, in English, binari. Yeah. The crossroads. Yes. And then it is, I just warm up, I just to change a little bit. The ball. Yeah. Go on two line, you know, it is a white and, and green line and give a little bit the control of the ball, the setter change. I can, I can say to the setter that they have to arrive, for example, to do 10, 15 set in the rove. And in the other side, there is a, there is second coach that is working already from now with the movement of the blocker. Just movement of the blocker on the blocker. And the defense and set and transition. So there is the, you see the first ball, it's more control and set. For middle blocker, middle blocker from second line, passing first line, move against position four, defense and set. Then assistant change the side, middle blocker move against opposite, against position two, defense and set. And this is also system, right? Because our system, for example, in the ball before is that. When there is position one, the defense, if the, if the ball is in the, in, in, inside of three meter, the priority and the competence is the blocker of first line, the set. If the defense is outside of, of three meter is position five. So it's in this case, middle blocker, like now, middle blocker of second line or libero situation. This is a system. Here the setter start to, start to warm up, work to. Uh, back set and, uh, still it, it, uh, it just warm up and then we start to work, you see, with the, uh, if I remember good was four ball and like you can see, uh, okay, there is one first, uh, third ball, like rotation one in this moment, in this moment, I, I was speaking with the setter, I think about, uh, a natural attitude to watch all the time position four and to be neutral with shoulder. And we work with four ball, but you see that the ball, it's all the time, all the time open from the net, exclamative, open, moving two, moving four. There is no one ball on the net, ball open is one, uh, I'm working in this period, especially in the last part, they are serving so much in, uh, position one. So I work, I work a lot with the setter, with ball, you know, with repetition of the ball. That I write, I write from back. So for one, what, uh, like feedback that they can give technical, uh, in this case, and there is three kind of, uh, three kind of ball movement when the ball, uh, move, uh, open from the net, uh, in position two, his ball is open more in the middle, not open from the net, everything what go in front of the setter. I asked the setter to start to move before the right feet. So the idea of the rhythm is to do right, left, right. To finish with the right setting for straight or to do the, the pivot and the technical that cause the pivot and to start to set back with the rotation and to finish with the right. But when the ball move more in situation of position two, apart from the net, I asked the setter to start to move the left feet. So to try to do left, right, left. Turn under the ball, every ball that, that move, uh, this ball, it's more right, left, right. And then, uh, pivot is more, you see left, right, left. You see clearly the difference of the ball that you take the last step to prepare and the right step to turn. And then the last step to, to stop. And then you said, this is the feedback to finish all the time with the right, with the one ball in front of it. Move in front. Okay. And then, for example, it's also depending about the angle of the ball, because in this case, it's a really, it's really the extreme case when the ball arrived from position one, for example, it's really, really almost not impossible, but really difficult to do right, left, right. I've under the ball with the ball that I ran from back. So in this case for position one, what, what I ask, it's more really to be, to be neutral. Yeah, she did, she did quite good. Yeah. I, I think I, I went to, to change a little bit the, the timing of the video retard because, uh, we work all the time with the, and the camera is, is putting with one big, big screen, like wall screen with the, with video retard and we, we watch the, the technical situation. In the other side, we can see during the, we come back with the center that they start to work with the, with the line. So middle. Blocker and opposite are working with the, with defense on the line situation, but continues to know the middle blocker. They move, they move on the block because after there is connection with the, with the ring of the setter and the, just, we change that the defense now is, is on the line situation. There is all the time one control also of the opposite, like before it was the blocker and they work, and they work in situation on the line, defense setter. Okay. This is the enter, enter of like more rotation of five or four. I don't know if we are working now with the two or three spiker. We work also with target for, for the slide, of course, but, uh, this changed a little bit, even with the exclamatory ball, the, with this ball exclamatory that we call wide top of the net, uh, changed for Max. This is, uh, this is for example, for probably. Faster and, uh, and what changed a lot in the system is that when the ball is perfect on the net for the slide, I speak for the slide of the middle blocker, you know, uh, is the setter that give time and anticipation to the, to the middle block. When the ball is open from the net, so it's exclamatory that you call a little bit more soft ball. It's, uh, it's, uh, it's the middle, it's the setter. Sorry. That if I say the opposite, I didn't miss. Take when the ball is perfect is the middle blocker that is there and is ready to attack. So the setter has to push the ball quicker and this middle blocker that give the time and the ball is open from the net is the setter that give soft ball. Like you say, this is the tempo of the ball that we need to attack. And so middle blocker wait one step more. If normally the middle blocker on the slide have the second. So the left. The right step. Okay. The second step, if we consider left, right, left or one right, right player to have the right step on the tax, then left attack when we play with this exclamatory ball slide on the setter tax, they have the first step to the left on the tax and then there is a right left. So we, we lose, we lose one tempo, one step to go to attack the ball. Soft exclamatory with the. With the middle block and back with the slide. And now I think we, yes, now we go, we go with the, with the situation of reading of the middle blocker and this is depend also about how many assistant you can have. No, we are in the gym. It is practice. The first, the first ball start from defense here. We were working with the, with the, with the middle blocker in defense because we needed to work with the middle blocker, the defense. So the ball starts with the middle blocker, setter set movement and reading of the middle blocker and in the other side, they give one second ball to the middle blocker to set and to resolve the situation. Okay. So there is first ball reading of the ball and the second ball without reading, it's one situation, for example, of three ball short to the opposite. It is one situation. That, uh, it arrived so much in the women volleyball. So it is number 15, for example, is the opposite that she's in first line. Okay. And she's taking care about the, the free ball, the easy free ball, that is one easy ball that we work so much because a lot of ball go, go short in position too. So I like so much these, uh, the, this practice and we are working quite a lot of times that the, the morning of the fitness, the Thursday. Okay. Uh, we tease the reading of the sector. So when we work during practice in the afternoon, more with blocker, okay, it's more, uh, analytics. So it's more technically. So the middle blocker know that to go to block against position for the blocker intuition too. It's more technically here. T is we put concentration really, really about the, the reading of, of the middle blocker sometimes, sometimes I change it and I put like challenge between. Yeah. The center in the blocker and sometimes the middle blocker read the sector and sometimes the, the middle blocker have to try to do one anticipation and to fake and to put in difficulty the sector. Yeah. So I change sometimes these, uh, his attitude to challenge a little bit also to, to put attention of the sector and to try to watch, you know, at this, I'm doing like that, for example, you see. Okay. That like this, uh, the, the sector and to watch, have to watch a little bit where, uh, and when go the middle blocker and to try to, to set in the other side, but it's also depend on what we decide to do on the block. Because for example, if we are against three spiker, it's more reading situation, the calamity. And if we are to spiker the important situation of the opposite, uh, the option is all to do one step on the right of the middle blocker to go strong against. Position four or against pipe, the direction one or to step on the left and to go against faster in a slide of, uh, of the middle blocker and pipe strong to six, five. This is just tactical preparation that in our system changed so much is set in interest line. There is simple, I prepare also a ball machine, a ball machine in the end for, uh, that I use. Uh, I use so much, honestly, more for, uh, jump spin service here. We can see this is really the, the, the beginning of the reception and normally the first couple minutes of, uh, of reception. Uh, I like so much to use one ball. If you see, I saw it, I was, I was watching it when I was reading it and I was like, why, why are they doing this? So I'm very, I work, I work all the time in the beginning, but really the first minute, two minutes. Yeah. Because it's, uh, it's really easier with the TZ inverted spin to, to push the ball. And, uh, in my opinion, in the beginning, give a lot of confidence also to the, to the, so in the beginning, just couple of minutes to feel, to feel better, the ball, uh, with TZ inverted spin that it's much, much more easier to, to push. Can I one day in a TSG world, if you remember something. It's still possible. Yes. Uh, but, uh, it's really easier. It's really easier, uh, and give a lot of confidence to the receiver, to, to push the ball. This is just warm up. Is that just warm up of reception with inverted spin. After we go, we go, we go with normal situation of, of flop. Here, the receiver, uh, like you can see, they are working, they are working more line to line. Libero in the other side, of course, don't work in five. But work with our system, that step, that step on the left and take the ball, go to cover outside hitter of reception, first line. So go step on the left and then we change. Uh, so warm up, we change with service from five to the line. Uh, they request, uh, now we pass, it was more in the, in the ball before and because here, uh, here with the reception from one, it's a little bit easier. In my opinion. But what I ask with the service, if, if we want to go just, just a little bit before Tia's in the, in this reception from five, yes, uh, uh, there is a lot of ball that stay after reception from five line to line that stay in position three and not too much in position two, three. At this, I ask how much that really the platform, the platform from service line to line five. Uh, the really platform and the shoulder give orientation really to position two, three, and to don't let the ball in the middle of the neck. This is one important objective that I asked to the receiver, to the receiver of, uh, of five. Now you, you can go if you want. Now there is still warm up. I think now in one, yeah, after this. Yes, this was really, really two, three minutes of, uh, of warm up. I wrote down line reception. I see the explanation question mark, because I noticed you were explaining. This is, uh, this is one exercise that I do and I, and I re I call, uh, shoulder blade is exercise. I really, I really do to feel, uh, the shoulder blade of reception. This one. Okay. I remember now. Yes. This is still with the, with easy ball because, uh, it's what I said before. It'll be, no, they have to feel that. They have to feel it is a scapulata. We say in Italian, the, the, the shoulder blade that go to finish the movement and the platform finish the movement, even with the shoulder blade, I, I believe so much in the situation of reception about also the mobility of the shoulder blade. And so what, what they, what they do here, they're trying to, to put one reception precise in position to work for, you know, yeah, this is what. A really, really good way that they can feel the, the, the shoulder blade that push in the other side, I continue to use this like warm up, but also like technical, and this is spend a little bit about, you know, also the, what, what you need in there, what you search, what is in this moment also the, the, uh, the week, maybe part of the reception. And in this moment, we was, uh, in my opinion, I remember this morning, I see the match, the last match, we was working a little bit less with this, with this lateral situation of, uh, the reception and with the teaser orientation. And for example, we was one mistake, you know, it's all the time to touch the ball and to open the arm, you know, to go, to go, to don't keep the platform during exercise platform, IPVL, keep one half second platform in reception and, and to open the. To open the arm and here in this exercise, they really can feel that the ball, the pushing, they keep one second, the platform, if you can see quite, uh, quite good, everybody, they keep, and then they relax. Okay. We work, uh, service one, one to five with like push the ball in position two. And after we change, we change and there we go. We go with normal situation of reception. Thank you. Are you going to use the machine? Yes. Here, uh, here, normally it depends. I, this, in this practice, I think that they start slot and they go to one ball, one ball of four in, in situational spin, the priority it's, uh, it's situational slot. But for example, in the last match was one strong, uh, strong service pin. We, we work just pin for example, and they start to do reception and they use every situation of the court. So for example, we can see this number five, she did three reception plot and now I'm all spin and after she changed with the, with liberal that of course she work in six, five. So she got to do a three ball flop. Now I speaking about my part that I serve against this number six, it is the liberal three ball flop and after one ball spin. Okay. When the outside hitter come back, she will not stay in five, but she go in six. So they use, they, they change all the time. The, the situation of, uh, of the position, uh, six, five, one. And like you can see in our system, we show six, uh, do one step on the left when the ball arrived from one, but if you can see, for example, these outside hitter in the other side, that is my position. My assistant that serve, she's not stepping. So we should see stay in the middle and the feedback that they give. You can see also now the outside hitting the other side, the line, the middle of the court, the line of the middle of the court have to stay between like, and there is service in diagonal in this way of position six in our system, there is all the time. Yeah. Yeah. So it's a kind of system with priority on the left and quite never on the right, because we play, we play inversed, inverted rotation one, now rotation one, there is outside hitter in on the left, outside hitter of first line in position two on the left and the, and the opposite that run and go to attack back or that go to attack in the middle. So the priority of reception, it's all the time on the left. With this system. Now outside hitter is in one and what I ask is to stay inside to let diagonal, for example, in this moment I'm serving, I ask to stay inside, you see, to let the situation of the line and another feedback important that I can give is the, is the position of the feet because, because, uh, in, uh, what I like to coach is the position of the feet that it is position one. One have all the time, the right feet more in front, which is more right feet and, uh, and the position five, the outside hitter of first line have more left feet in front and this is, uh, it's like I said before, because six and one with the, this, uh, position of never neutral feet and with the, with the, with the right in front, they have already attitude to be open on the left, the left. The left back. So they are already open to move, to move on the left with competence, to go on the left. Is this is the reason. And now, now, for example, we can see five in reception in diagonal, in the other side, what, what I ask it's really to don't stay on the line lateral, but to come more inside, come more inside and normally the feet. Back is to stay between really in the middle, between line of the middle and line of lateral side. And you can see now this player, the other side in five that stay really between the middle, between line of the middle of the court and lateral line. If there is one reception on them left part, they go to do reception and they are ready, already ready to do them approach and to go to a pack. And on the right side, they just do. Maximal, like one set only with the right foot and the rest is just for the player or the libero next to him. The, the, the long ball in diagonal, in the corner, the competence is off, is off position six. They go to take the long ball. And then, uh, in, in, in other things that we are doing here, for example, of the, the player that they are working, for example, now with me, they change so much the attitude, really the posture of the body. Between the first three ball, where I ask to re to relax the shoulder, put the shoulder in front to relax the arm and to attack the ball between the last ball spin, where they do a step back and really change the attitude, like position of the defense. And now we get the ball up. Yes, they go back and you see that now the platform are up, the elbow are more near the attitude. It's more down with the leg. And it's more like defense situation. Now you cannot see, but now there is, uh, the machine around, I think two and a half round and was really strong. Like they have really have one good aptitude to have, uh, to have defense. I, I never ask precision precision plus in situation of, uh, of one important jump spin service, but I ask really to the important situation. You need to have at least one ball exclamative in three meter. It's enough against one strong ball. That's important. It's enough to have one exclamative ball, the middle of the court, like the, exactly like this ball already. It's already really good. And then we continues like that. Then after we rest and we, and we change side of the, of the receiver, I think this is, uh, this is also the end. Yes. And we change. Side of the, the reception in the, in the, in the dual situation. 