This is a progression like similar, okay, of the cover with two blocks. But this I put on the net four blocks. Of course, in the middle of the net, if you can see, there is one little a little like a pole, okay, like stick that keep the net because it's not falling down, but we are not too much jumping here, so it's not dangerous. And here there is, I'm doing the first part. Here there is, there is all situation of the cover using really all the net and all the combination. So there is a cover of situation of middle blocker with first tempo. There is cover of seven. There is cover of direction of pipe. So if a situation of piper plus they can attack, okay, and produce the real rally of the cover also from the second line. So it is really complete, complete and we can see clearly that this practice have more quality from now. You can see clearly that was not up for two day of rest that there is more more rhythm. There is quality. The girl move more quicker. And here again, there is there is a little bit the same idea with the with situation of cover on side two three cover all the time for one physical situation might don't go too much overcharge physically and you see even here the the middle blocker attack seven. What is really important, really important in the system is that when there is one attack from the with middle blocker. So with the situation of seven or first tempo, it's really important that libero to position five stay along. It's really important because the first mistake if all everybody watch a little bit of the plane or the team there is that is position five libero lot of time. So short is me the blocker short center short pipe short and there is a last part of the the court all the time free without situation of the quarter is arrive a lot of time. So I put a lot of attention with the with movement. Okay, with the with position five. So especially with the libero have to adapt the situation to read the sector and if there is one ball one ball in the middle to stay long because the the priority of. Short cover is of position six active lateral two and four active to take care active to don't stay outside just to approach but to active to do a step setter is there but also me the blocker also position six short and five to stay long this exercise. It's also it's also good in my opinion also for the for the attack because they can try when there is short ball when there is long ball they can adapt a lot. Situation of the approach and also of the shot, you know, which one it's one practice complete also for the for the direction of the pack after situation of the cover set and they have to be precise not to resolve also situation of second touch to put like we say before then ball near to the net and to give a possibility to attack before we was we was working from the ball exclamatory from back to remember the exclamatory exclamatory exclamatory and to three ball for the new the blocker and here we work from situation of defense and transition. So had the player start all the time from the side of the attack. There is transition and there is and there is play and there is game. So the ball started not from from the situation of exclamatory ball from back like more of reception exclamatory but more from more from cover. You see first first ball is cover now the assistant culture. So the ball starts from cover situation and then we play we play normal situation and after there is there is defense. Okay, there is defense. So we don't work. We don't work a middle blocker move all the time from the good side. There is transition and game and we go and we go like that. We change and we change the line of outside hitter. We change the line of of the center and opposite. We play with three Spiker with two Spiker and we try like I said before I try all situation in the beginning of week. Without without team too much about starting six or everything like that. And like you see it is attack for example. That's nice. Yeah, it's one block out of lateral that that search that search is situation and it's the real situation that we try we try so after the situation of the cover. They have to share the point, you know, you have to search the point and then you know, if I want to repeat we repeat there is there is no problem about that about the repetition. I will go to but in nine, but I think it's still the same we can check it. Yes, it is. These I think that, you know, change middle blocker. We just change the lines here. You can see here. Yes, for example that here. I'm using the system of of that position for house editor. They change the square for in the other side seats first line for they go. They turn like that. They like this. They change also setter and and everybody turn the alternative line in this way. I don't change just the line between the same quarter, but they change the round, you know, both sides and they go from four or decide six that side. Four and then six or four. Yeah, that's exactly the only just to just to just to give the feedback technical. The only things that I don't like too much with this kind of block. I like so much in the situation of the cover. I like so much the situation of block out lateral and close to go out in situation of diagonal. I don't like too much the higher of this dog. I'm only where we play because to search the block out longer is to. Too much is block is too much. But again, the objective to use this block. It's really more about situation of the code. No, it's also and then it's again difference between women and men volleyball, but like there are women that are very good in that, but there are not so many players that are really good in spiking and really high long block out, you know, then you really have to just go for the for the wall that yes. Yes, this is true because it's not it's really not easy like also powerful the attack and everything but we work I work a lot about the situation to make this happen. Yeah, yes. Yes, especially especially with adaptation of the approach when the ball move when the ball moving to enforce or red and red and and blue like a like we say before the ball moving position to for example, the outside hitter need absolutely to. To adapt approach and to come more inside these I give a lot of these these idea and about where I write the ball. So when the ball is we take for example, a position for K of this side when the ball is precise. I asked so much to try the block out long 261 when the ball is short, I like and I ask a lot situational block out longer to search the left ends of the opening in the block. This is the two. But we work a lot but not with free block but with the with the rubber. This is this is my colleague and friend Lorenzo. Michelli dodged that that give me this feedback and it's really really good because we put the upper and to the highness it's more more less down less high of of this block. So it's at least the higher of the block normally that they are. I have to block the the player and we try to attack and to really touch really touch this up that longer. It is a really really pay a lot about the long block out and fortunately this system. I'm honest with you. But yes, you need to use if you have challenge. I think the last match that we play at home, I think we won probably four ball four ball with the with the long block. A block that's room to use challenge because you know, you practice this situation, but you need to have the way to catch the point. That's why during for example, this is also one suggestion that I can give we work when we play six and six during the practice the rubber we are a we use a situation of two challenge during one set. So we play for example set in 15 special point until 25 and during this set. The team have to challenge and and how they can call challenge for example, a spiker attack ball go out the attacker the spiker need to call challenge to the block opponent. And of course we are we are the same team but and we have to be honest between each other. So if the block touch you need to say touch we use a lot of this system and I believe so much in the block out long even with the woman not easy. But we work with analytic just to try to find them to touch the block out long. No, exactly. And you prove my point wrong. It's like if you have the time to practice on it and you become good in it, then you're doing something that other teams are not used to, you know, that it becomes a superpower. Yes. And it becomes very very powerful. What was really even last year was clear. No was something that example. La Valera was was using was really to prepare the match to put all the position six out of the court or situation of the ball like little bit in the man, you know, that not arrived too much because they were searching like crazy. This is block out longer and and was paying so much in this year. This year is paying honestly. We are we are we are scoring quite with the good number of the ball with the with the long block out with challenge. We challenge. 