This is the planning, the planning of one of our, of our season that normally I use to put the week on the left. I like so much to put every week for responsible of the week for the material. So for the ball, for the balls and that's the ball or for everything of the gym. That is, I think, and I believe that it's one little but big rules that, that give, that give also discipline inside of the, of the team is start from the beginning. But I think that it's one little things that, that help a lot the team between teammates to help each other and to give, and to give rules, you know, and, and of course, this is part of, of the job, in my opinion, it's really important to give rules. But this is another, another subject about the planning before we watch, for example, the was a year after two day of rest, but one normal week in our planification, okay, it's more, it's more like that. Like this week that we finished now where, where we had the Sunday free. So with fitness in green all the time, Monday morning fitness is. Work, work relation in French practice in the afternoon, then here it's more than three. Unfortunately here, I don't have the space practice. And that's why, for example, this practice, I can move sometimes on Thursday morning, but this is depend about planification. This is the second practice of the new week and in this two week, generally jump and his practice in the morning. Normally. I'm not. Not use it too much to jump. So I use this practice in the morning, but it's also, uh, he's also depend about physically situation, physical structure that you can have in your team and everything medical part. But, uh, I don't like too much, honestly, to jump five day in a row last match, especially, especially this is in the end now, for example, in the end of the, of the season. So I use this week of Wednesday morning more to do situation of. Yeah. Defense service and reception without situation of junk. I can work in this kind of practice to, with the attack from the plinth on the lateral attack from the plinth to find them shot and to work in internet rotation and anticipation of the, the blocker with set and that set all the time. And then there is Wednesday free in the afternoon. And then here is fitness. The second fitness of the, of the week on Thursday. Okay. Okay. With the, the practice in the afternoon and then this is the, the, the practice before match that normally it's a one, uh, really short practice, not too much longer where we jumped and don't so much. And this is day of the match where, where we do, where we do volley and we call the crossage in French and then, and then the match, like you can see, for example, uh, the planning planning, consider a three. There is a three situation of the video and this is the first video that we do this about the, the, the spiker, the open spiker, where we, where we analyze, uh, how we have to, what we have to do in defense and, uh, con in blocking defense. This is the second video that, uh, that we do, uh, and it's about the side out of the opponent team or how we start in the block and the. And the, the, the decision and the tactical that we do, especially with the, with our, with the blocker and our direction of the service. And this is the last video that generally, generally we do. I like to do the morning, the morning of the match. It's one short video, and this is a by group, my assistant coach, take, uh, take the middle blocker, the receiver, the outside hitter and delivery, and, uh, they watch, uh, two couple of situation, they watch the, the reception, uh, sorry, the, the service of the opponent team, but it's more, it's more one discussion that they had because I like so much to put online this kind of, uh, this kind of video. So they watch at home before the opponent service and even a middle blocker and opposite they watch because we have a lot of time also short service. So for me, it's important that also middle blocker. Yeah. Opposite, they watch, they watch if there is some situation of short service, and then the assistant coach ask and put a little bit order, if they have some question, if there is, you know, some, some, uh, special situation, how we have to move, for example, against one jump spin, the priority can change, not to go on the left, but there is some kind of wall that we go on the right, more, especially in some jump spin situation. And I stay with the setter. It is, uh, it is the last video. I stay with setter. And I, and I work with them about break point of the opponent team and the action of the middle blocker and how they work against, uh, again, generally it's six, uh, six kind of, uh, of ball. So against first tempo, against seven, against two, your tempo back, against fast, and against the two situation of ball moving in four and two. So this is the, the three video that we do. And plus there is a, you can see. Also the little bit, the physical part, it's, uh, it is prevention, uh, individual routine that they do like prevention before practice and the, the, uh, and the cryotherapy, the cryotherapy part after, after volley, uh, that generally, uh, physical preparator don't like too much to put in the day, in the day of fitness. But, uh, for example, uh, this is depending because Thursday. In the, in the end of the week, uh, we prefer to do cryotherapy is moment of the, of the season. Even if we do fitness in the morning, because, uh, to be a little bit tired and we don't like too much to do. He don't like, sorry, too much to do a little bit about the player to do cryotherapy day before the match. I like this week a lot because you're like, depends on, on how you recuperate, of course. Normally on Thursday afternoon, you should be pretty fresh because from Wednesday or Wednesday noon until, okay, your fitness training on Thursday, but you have like an extra half a day, you know, otherwise if you, if you trade every evening, you know, it's, it starts to be very, you know, it starts to be a very heavy. Yes, but this, this system of, uh, of where the morning I like, I, I try even, even season before to have this Wednesday morning. Or at least Wednesday, even if it's not morning, it's a little bit later, you know, in the middle of the day, uh, and to switch, uh, to switch the, uh, the week with the, with the jump. These, uh, these, I see that, uh, it pays for much also physically. The season is really long. And then again, it's also about which team you have, how many players you have. If you have one team with 14, 15 players, it's something, if you have a team with 12, 13 players, it's different, all the situation of the jump, especially for the, with the joker. And so, and so we are working in this way. 