Okay, we're going to serve only.
Every rally is going to begin with a serve.
I'm very big on this one.
And I'm happy to see that in recent years,
a couple of very important coaches have embraced that idea.
Certainly not from me, although I'm good friends with one of them.
So if you ask, for example, I can name some people.
If you ask Lorenzetti, and if you ask Francesco Petrella,
who is the new coach of Modern Mouth,
of course, in the last several years, they work together.
So if you ask them how many serves they had per practice in 6-on-6,
they will tell you numbers that will make you stare like that.
So I reach, on normal days, 120 serves only in 6-on-6.
I got up to...
Almost 200.
But on normal days, it's going to be 120 serves.
Those are the only ones that count.
I don't, in both senses of the word, count.
I literally do not count other serves.
Plus, they count more because they're specific.
I want to run my side out from a serve.
I want to run my break point from a serve.
We need to solve problems.
So to steal Lorenzetti is very, I think, very effective.
It's a very effective way of calling it, if you just put balls in.
It's like drugged practice, you know, it's the same.
Okay, feel good, guys.
Give a rhythm.
The ball is up in the air.
We do stuff.
Whereas 6-on-6, just with serves, that sucks, man.
Then you really...
That's train ugly.
And those people who don't know train ugly, just Google train ugly and you will find a
lot of stuff.
Don't train for the immediate feeling of success.
Don't train for success of things working, you know, work to solve problems.
And then suddenly in the game, you have the problem.
And why?
Because you've got to receive.
The pass serves.
So people don't have enough receptions in the live situations.
And that's a problem.
Okay.
I want them to receive a lot of balls, but I want them to receive balls in real situations.
So those numbers are never enough.
Just count your numbers.
And even if you don't have a statistician, just feel one practice.
Where you run your ball, your most typical practice.
Don't change anything.
Feel the 6-on-6, count how many receptions every receiver has.
You will cry.
It will never be enough to achieve mastery.
So that's why you need a lot more.
If I have 120 serves, I would have serve errors also.
Okay.
But if I had 120 serves in and I have six receivers, I have four outside hitters, typically
and two liberals.
I'm going to give an average of 20.
Okay.
I'm going to give an average of 20.
I'm going to give an average of 20.
I'm going to give an average of 20.
And we're going to also be mindful of spreading the repetitions among everybody.
That's a number.
20 live repetitions of something.
That's practice.
If I have four, what are you getting better at?
You're getting better at hoping to become a receiver in my mind.
