But I do want to have a series of options, one of which is the slide.
There's no reason to me why, you know, any fourth division women's team can run that and a men's team can't do that.
Also, it takes a lot of load off the opposite.
At a good level, but not the super top level, you see a lot of blocking on almost half of the net.
So when the center is front row, the position four blocker is attached to the middle blocker.
They just leave the opposite out, you know, and people can't score.
It's tough to score with the middle.
It's tough to score with the opposite.
And that's why people do it.
They don't do it because they're crazy.
They do it because they're right.
They block, you know, 55% of the net.
And then it's hard to run a pipe.
How can you run from position six if you have a second blocker that's already there?
You only have one direction.
OK, yeah.
I want to break that, you know, so I want to have middle running slides.
I want to have middle running a slide.
Yeah.
Yeah.
In transition, easy transitions where a tip or a touch ball by the block takes the opposite out of the offense.
You can be the best.
So what I just said before, if you have Kurek as your opposite, you're going to have position four blockers having to take care of him.
OK, but even if you have Kurek or even if you have, you know, the best opposite in the world, if they fall, they can't attack.
So if I tip him to the floor.
If I tip him to the floor, then I don't have him.
And you can't tell me, yeah, well, then you have position six running because there is no time and there is nowhere to land.
Because if there is sides on the floor, where is the position six guy running?
And no one does.
Who does that?
No one runs position six to one in those situations.
But it's an easy ball, though.
Easy ball, the only problem is we lost one side of the net.
Middle has appropriate footwork, runs behind the center.
Off one foot, easy to do.
Once we find it, it's something that people should learn how to do when maybe we will never learn it.
But we're going to try until the last day of the season to run that play and we don't need to run it very often.
I just need to have a blocker out there when I have him.
I'm happy because the setter can turn and dunk the ball down, having not having position for bugging him.
Pipe can be set against one blocker, you know, do whatever you want.
You want to follow my slide, follow my slide.
We're never going to score.
Fantastic.
OK, so I want that play in.
So that's what we're doing here.
