After the 3-on-3, oftentimes we're going to play with score, like we will see in a few minutes.
What we're seeing here is what I call attack work 6-on-6. So it's a portion of 6-on-6
that's going to be typically 15-20 minutes, where we don't have a score. We call it attack
work because we're creating specific situations of attack, predetermined attack, and then as a
concept, we would then play ball. So what we'll have here is a sequence where I think it's four
balls. The first and the third are going to be middle. Middle has to attack, and on the other
side it's going to be 1-on-1 commit block, but the ball goes to the middle. And then the second and
fourth commit block are going to be middle. And then the second and fourth commit block are going
to be middle. And then the second and fourth commit block are going to be middle. And then the second
and fourth commit block are going to be middle. And then the second and fourth commit block are going
to be middle. And then the second and fourth commit block are going to be pins. So 4-on-2 or 4-on-1
if the setter is front row. Of course, it's getting middle attackers clear repetitions. Later,
when there is a score and the game is normal, of course, the middles attack less. So that's why,
for thwart, they have more repetitions in this rail. So there are balls that are going to be
middle. Then we still have the two pins. We don't know where we're going to
set, but I want the middle to be beating and moving because we need to get better at that
for sure. And then we play volleyball. So let's say four balls. We have here our system coach
is putting a controlled serve. We're going to have four balls in that direction and then four balls
in this direction coming towards us. We will see here two things. One is right now we can see,
if you
can run it, the setter is front row and we will see the middle running a slide attack and scoring
with a tip, which basically leads me to my utmost joy. We do run slides. And you can pull it for a
second because then we go to the, just go back to a couple seconds right after the kill, so to speak.
So I explain what we do when there is a kill. If there is a first ball to side out kill, so if the
ball goes down, first attempt, we're going to have what we call an extended play. So we put the
ball in, and we have to play it. So in this case, and we will see that in a second extended play,
is like an over dig that goes to the side. And that's just a tap and it's going to be an easy
ball. And that's why I showed the glitch before. That is going to be a trick play. So you can
just run it now. The middle is scoring, first ball side out kill. Good. Okay, and now comes, okay, just safety.
Of course aito.
Good! Okay, and now comes. Okay, just safety.
course ball out of the way and then we get easy ball trick play we might make
it we don't make it whatever happens no problem but we we practice okay this is
the moment to make mistakes it's a moment try things so the next ball would
be not for the middle four or two and then we play volleyball if you play
volleyball there is no second no second ball so on the second ball we the middle
six jumps see that's again that is different people first ball slide kill
okay trick play but you can do whatever you
want so you can set directly you can give it to the center and then we're
out what or does because he has to be ready for the direct set by the liberal
and then attack normally if the ball goes to the center you can't tell them
you gotta have them do it and find out how to do and this is the second ball
fourth
four and two or four and one in this case and then we
well that was not the legendary rally but we played the rest okay so we're
gonna do 15 20 minutes of that with some pretty one one day we'll have people and
then high ball against triple block like we'll have all sorts of things that we
want to practice uh by the way to anticipate the question I know you would ask is we never repeat
hardly ever repeat anything hardly ever if we're gonna repeat something and that's gonna be really
exceptional it's gonna be in that drill
