So, like, if we go to the end here, you see, like, all these guys.
And I was like, what is going on here, you know?
So, yeah, go ahead.
At the end of every practice, all the guys, we wrap up with the guys on the line.
And the first thing I say is, what thoughts do you have?
And we ask their guys to kind of share how they thought practice went, what they.
And it can go sometimes positive, sometimes negative.
It's pretty broad spectrum.
But it's about engaging them with how they felt practice went.
Sometimes they'll give a compliment to one guy and everybody claps.
And so it's really good.
It's engaging.
We've been doing this for a long, long time.
I can't even, probably since the beginning.
It certainly does look daunting when you look at it.
You're like, hey, why is there 28 or 29 guys?
And then ultimately, so all the guys go first.
And then my assistant coaches usually have some feedback and incursions a little bit more on the defense side.
Gives us expectations.
I'm passing side, but certainly they can do anything.
And then I kind of wrap up.
And then if there's anything agenda wise, we need to make sure that's coming up for the next day or things like that.
We cover real quick.
And then if you watch it, you end up seeing them do high fives.
So if you play it and we're done talking.
Tyler, the guy all the way to the right there ends up going high fives and everybody high fives and huddles at the end and all that stuff.
And so which is, I don't know, just a good team camaraderie thing at the end, which is nice.
And then the guy.
Stretch out for 10 minutes.
Give or take the video cuts off here, like in three seconds.
So I will, but I will put that, I will put it inside.
Yeah.
And then we have it also.
I know then the obvious question, what we just said two minutes ago before we started recording, like, can you explain to European coaches?
What is the red shirted player?
Do you have volunteers here?
Like, are all these guys part of the program?
Like, just like, let's let me ask that.
Yeah.
Ignorant question.
And yeah, you go.
Well, we'll talk about the red shirt thing first.
So typically in America, you get five years of eligibility, but four years to play.
So what that means is, is you get 10 semesters of school.
Usually that equates out to five years, but you can only have four years of eligibility to actually participate.
So that affords you the opportunity to red shirt.
And this can go in any sport.
So basically red shirting typically happens in a freshman year.
Doesn't mean it couldn't happen in another year.
Uh, but it happens that freshman year and we usually typically are, are recruiting classes or anywhere between five and seven.
We bring five or seven guys in.
And if you did a mass seven times four would be, you know, uh, roughly about 28 guys, give or take in terms of that.
Uh, we're a little heavy this year.
We're closer to 30.
We did bring a little larger class of 11 guys.
So typically that's not what we're doing, but we are red shirting eight guys out of this class.
So basically what a red shirt means is they do everything.
The team does practice weights, film, or all part of the team.
I think changes on that.
Uh, but they don't compete in actual matches when we start our championship season.
So like right now we're currently in our non-championship season, uh, for about five or six weeks.
And we have about four play dates.
Those red shirts can play a little bit in those play dates, which is always nice because you can kind of mix them in and see how they do.
Uh, especially on days where we play like multiple matches and two or three games.
And, but when you get to January.
They won't participate matches, but they'll take time to get extra lifts there and the extra reps in.
And like, even on a game day, like a Friday game day, uh, they might go in and get an extra lifting or something about playing that day.
And really as young men, it affords them the opportunity to see the speed of the game, get used to school mature.
Cause you and me both know young men at 18 can be a little bit of a struggle.
And certainly by the time they're 23, they're in such a better space.
So.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
You just see his volleyball, you know, IQ and everything just at a higher level.
And our, so our team's best successes, like our final four teams and our championship teams, you know, those teams had multiple red shirts that were on the floor, you know, whether they're junior seniors, things like that.
And so we've seen a lot of success, but we're a little different.
I think in a program that we take a lot of guys and we train them a lot and we'll see some of them.
see some of those guys really jump the ball where you maybe never would have would have thought they
would be at we see other guys become great program guys where they're just part of the system and
i mean those guys are the backbone of the program and they they really make things
cheering and push and you know like my assistant coach kirschner who's fantastic he's a young guy
you know he came in and you know ended up being more of kind of a role player and
he was a red shirt but he was that backbone energy guy practice guy and has become a fantastic
coach after that so i think uh a little bit expanded from the red shirt but in terms of
kind of how we use that within our program yeah for sure the word is never meant demeaning you
know but like how you make it sound and how you integrate it it's something yeah it's it's you
you can really feel part of the team and like you just mentioned like how i understand it it sounds
more like a meritocracy you know you can be a freshman and be an important player for
the team you can be a point scorer but you can like at the same time you can be just like a
backbone guy and be important for the program yeah the three things we look at red shirts when they
come in or look whether or not we're red shirting is where are they at volleyball can they make an
impact right away on the court i mean that's key are they going to beat out some guys in front of
them we look at their schooling uh we have a thing here called four plus one so you can get your
undergrad in four years and get your accelerated masters in the fifth year and you can do that
multiple different disciplines uh and then we look at the final year and then we look at the final
financial side ultimately a fifth year of school costs a little bit more so where are we at
scholarship wise where is the kid at financial license so we look at all three of those things
which each individual kid and make the best decision for them and their family uh by january
in terms of where we think they might be no that's great no it's for sure something that needs to be
sustainable for all parties otherwise it's also yeah uh yeah no great i had seven to eight
questions about like do they have different objectives how are they part of the team etc
but in a way you just answered everything
more or less every question so that's really that's really great we do try to make sure those
guys like and we do this with all our incoming guys but like our incoming guys have a couple
extra things like they meet with our assistant coaches once a week just about life lessons
that extra thing we do an extra individual for all the red shirts that's kind of coach
grad and coach orientated so they're getting extra reps so there are some things we get an
extra lift in for those guys so it's like hey you really need to push in the weight room so yeah we
we do put some things in place for those guys it says hey you're not being forgotten
we really want you to excel and be good uh and we take that extra time with them it's gonna be an
eye-opener for european people and that's uh that's part of what we're doing so that's great
