Yesterday I used it. I used it with the here in the national team. So from the first period, I have two. So I had three setters the first period. Now one got injured and one got cut. So we brought two setters. And yesterday, exactly, not yesterday, Saturday, no, Friday, in the afternoon, she was here since Wednesday. And the ball was always short. She had very good hands, but she doesn't jump when she's set. So not always when she's set to four. And I used the tempo hook for her. Because the ball was always dropping short. The ball was always dropping short. And I used the tempo hook and it helped her a lot. The feedback from her was like, I really like it. Okay. So here, what we are doing is... So setting from the libero, obviously. You saw that in the previous practice in the morning, we didn't do the setting. So setting from the libero and setting transition set out of the libero defense. And then one ball coming from... So the ball from the libero is coming from five. And then you have one ball from the coach coming a little bit from 6-1, right? And then on the other court... As we were talking before, you have a tempo hook. And then we are working on side-out footwork. So in that case before, Madison was coming from five, like I said, the five, right? Coming from the, let's say, the left of the court, right? But now it's Sigon Isada with the same pattern. So you change the positions and you also have the basket and you also let them run from different sides now. I think that's what I remember. Yeah. Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. So now it's setter one, right? It's setter one, yeah. Yeah. Yeah, you're still preparing. You're preparing. So if I'm not wrong, so now here we are changing now the libero sets four. The libero sets four and the setters are defending the line, right? And here we have two different kind of footworks on the other side. We have the, let's say, before it was like setter five, right? So approach from the left and now we have setter one, kind of a setter one approach from the right, and we have two balls. So a setter one side out, setting back, and then we have just a second ball working a little bit on the hex. Okay. We, because when the setter, when our setter is front row with a net, we have, we don't play the five. We play this hex between the slide and the, and between the six. So we are working just on the second ball on the hex, so, so yeah, we did this side out footwork coming from five and coming from one, and as a second ball, just this hex. Cause I saw, I think I saw three games where the hex you play with the, with the opposite, right? Yeah. Or you play there and just left-handed, right man? Yes. With the left-handed, we play, we play hex. And then with the, our, with Adela, with our, our right, we were playing, we were playing a little bit more five. But because she felt more comfortable with the five instead of the hex, but in some rotations, we keep, we keep the hex because a lot of, a lot of teams are doing now, if your slide, if the slide, the, the middles don't get set in the slide out of system, they are going a lot option four, the middles stay in neutral and just kind of one or two steps on in four. But with the hex, you cannot, because even if it's a little bit out of system, you can set the hex. Okay. With a net, you, you, you cannot go for, you cannot leave alone a net. But so we are working a little bit on that. No, you, you don't really need a hoop for that because it's kind of a ball that doesn't fly, right? It's a ball that goes a little bit up and down and needs to be a little bit loopy. So with this other hoop that we have, we just put a basket on, on top and just make sure that the ball drops there. The same, the same thing that we were. We were doing before, but in, in, uh, now it's two courts, libero six and just one court, libero six to pass it in one. And they just, uh, always for sure. And when the service is one-to-one, you just work with one player on passing. Right. And, uh, and then connection six, five with the libero and an outside. Now what we are working on, it's, uh, um, we start having a lot of problems in the reception one-to-one. Okay. In the reception, when the service one-to-one, especially setter one. Right. Because the libero wants to help. What means that it creates a lot of confusion there. Then at the end, the outside end up, uh, like pressing more forward and being very close to the three meter line. And I don't like that because actually service one-to-one outside here to take the long seam. So we were at some point we're struggling a lot. And then normally with the service one-to-one, I don't, I don't like like working with two players because normally the long seam is just. From position one, but we were having so much problems that I said, okay, let's go with the, you see, we have a lot of, you see, normally. Okay. Who's taking this ball? Oh, normally position one should go and take it. But in setter one, okay. Deliver is going to take it. Okay. But we have to communicate, understand what I mean? So you see there's communication. This is what we want. Now they are discussing, that's what we are trying to create. Right. So, especially just for this setter one, that the libero is in six and the outside hitter is, is in. And then we were just trying to create this, this situation a little bit. 