Okay. So on the board here, we have our warmup is three plus two plus three plus two. I will put a little bit more detail on that, but that's my assistant writing it. So she makes like three minutes of core work or three minutes of band work, two minutes of core work, three minutes of dynamic, and then two minutes just to throw the shoulder to get warm. It's a morning practice. So that's quite short, but we are not, we don't do anything too intense in the morning. And there are other drills that come after that you can kind of continue the warmup. So it's just like a bit of body prep that they, a chance that they get. And we, we like to structure the warmup so that players aren't just like flopping around doing nothing, but give them that autonomy as well, because a lot of them have little exercises from our physios or our strength coach that they need to achieve. And I mean, we're not going to write that all down on the board, but we have an idea of what they, what they kind of need to do. Great. First one starts around here. Good. Let's take a look. We have, yeah, we have two chords going. Unfortunately we only have one camera that we use. Okay. So a big focus today in this, in this training, we were working on our Parsons, like getting in the line. And that for us means like getting basically their platform in the line of the ball. So with their feet, that means like shuffling. I don't really care if they shuffle or they cross over, but if I teach from a base, I teach a shuffle. If I get a player who crosses while I don't care. Like, so in this case, most of our girls need to practice who were here this day and need to practice this shuffle. So like kind of a one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, so we started the game with, with the three shuffle at the base and then getting the platform leading with that to be in the line. So the big key is getting in the line and that we explain it with those, those sub keys. Our setter is working on running in from rotation for sometimes. And then she's saying sometimes because if we just run it back and forth, then honestly, again, that's a really big load we need to be careful of. So here, she's gonna run into a rotation, rotation for entry. And we need her to practice her four steps for that. So a one, two, three, four and face pretty often in the game. In particular, if we counted out, she's doing six or seven. And so she's still running on paths of contact. And we really struggled to come back and get those balls on the shift to four. So even at like this level and this girl's played for me for four years, we still need to occasionally come in and drill down. Hey, let's just practice our one, two, three, four footwork so that we're clean. And that's what we're doing today. And then, yeah, palms to target. So I believe, like, of course, we can have really good footwork, body work, all that kind of thing. But at the end of the day, good that we control everything with the hands. And so we want to make sure that we are able to pick situations with our hands as well as getting all our footwork right. So those are some keys we're working in a really like light situation that's fairly controlled. Also interesting what you said about the movement in reception. Like what do you ask from players if they already did a crossover move in reception that you're like not want to change it? And I think that's a really important distinction to make also for people that because a lot of people and coaches think about, let's change it into what is my perfect template. And it's not always about that. Right. But then it's like, at least for me, I always have to take a check on if I'm working for my ego or for what's actually best. So, like, of course, I have I have keys. I have a whole manual with keys. I have a whole manual of like ideal techniques and things like that and stuff. I would teach you about teaching from the base. But the fact is, there are definitely more than one way to do everything. And there's maybe my way isn't right for everybody. So the keys that I have are really they really should allow for interpretation and for different things. Like they're just kind of bases that you can work from with like the movement that's intended instead of exactly what your feet are exactly doing. You know, so at the end, if my keys are so. What's the word limiting, then they're probably not great and I can't be limiting the player. So if someone is already doing something at a really high level and it maybe isn't what I would teach from the base, then maybe I need to think about that. That might be better than what I'm doing. Or maybe I need to start to think about why as well. And I don't need to adjust every single player. Otherwise, it's just really about my ego. And we don't need things to be about your ego and coaching. Well, that's where you're getting to really big problems. So. No. Yeah. Two things. They're fixing. Is it improving? Improving? It isn't fixing. It's not about fixing something. It's about improving. Right. And for sure, like the, with, with the timeframe that you have in a pro team, it's different than you have like a freshman coming in, you know, into your program. You have two, three years to work and you can plan something here. Yeah. Some players that arrive, you will have to be able to play a game in two and a half months, three months after they arrive. So, or like maybe even shorter. For sure. Like, and you, yeah. And even like, I agree, but I also believe like in being able to give the best to the players. So if they come in. And then something hurts because of a technique they're doing, like, I have a couple of girls that have an arm swing that really puts a lot of stress on the shoulder. I will slowly like work to help them get a little bit more rotation. Um, and that will be changing their technique over time, but it is really just to take the stress off, off their shoulder, you know, or if someone is bad at something and, and like they can't receive and biomechanically, they're doing something that doesn't make a lot of sense. Like, of course I'm going to work to change them. Um, but if something's kind of working, they're healthy, nothing hurts and it's a good result. And. Maybe, maybe it's a. It's a good way, you know? And so we need to be a little bit more flexible on that. Exactly. So here, uh, yep. We're still doing exactly the same thing. Yeah. We just changed a little bit. Okay. Okay. No, I just, I just felt that you could say that. That's why I went into it. You know, like it's, it's an important message to, I'm, I'm, I'm really excited to say that. So I'm pretty excited to say this though. It's a good, I am because like, I, I go, I've played, like, maybe we don't put this in the video, but I played for so many coaches that like. A lot of my coaching, not all of it, but some of it comes from, you know, when I was a player, what things like frustrated me or like what, you know, didn't make a lot of sense and why, and then maybe now that I'm a coach, I realized that I was the silly one and I didn't realize that what we were doing was important, but most often it was just stuff that kind of didn't make a lot of sense. So everything that I am trying to do, um, is something that makes sense or has a reason, has a logic to it. And, um. I forgot even what we were talking about. The exact thing, but that that's why. Yeah, no, I wanted to say, I wanted to say the exact same things for sure. I wasn't easy for sure. Later in my career, I was a really difficult player for my coaches. And if you're a really difficult middle blocker is different than your difficult setter or, you know, so that's different. But if I also look back now getting to know way more coaches, like in this, this timeframe, the last two years and thinking about how I was trained, yeah, there were like. But then again, I am, I'm also talking to coaches that were my coach and that's what they're telling me right now. There's a difference between what somebody tells you and what somebody is doing on a day-to-day basis or not, but for sure they changed. And when I see that, I'm also happy that like, they're not training the people anymore. Like they trained me, you know, 20 years ago. Yeah, yeah, yeah, for sure. For sure. For sure. Anyways. Yep. There's like, Oh, I agree. Yes. Can we rewind to the first part? Yeah. Thanks. I think it's, um, so. Starting at 26, it started on the other side of here. Yeah. Okay. So basically, you know, a part of our practice planning comes after we play games. I have like a spreadsheet where, you know, all the coaches can write little notes in, and we started to notice that we were just kind of bad at random situations. And, but they were specified into like, after a block, like if a tip is coming, maybe I can take this ball instead of, you know, waiting, the libero just runs up and like busted into behind me or something like this. So, you know, a second touch landing from the block. So then we work backwards and we try to simulate it. Um, and often we're like, we try things like it's a straight up new exercise. We don't know how well it's going to really apply or work. Um, so this would be the first time that we're doing this one. Um, it's a morning practice again, so we don't really want them getting too many jumps. Um, so they're doing really like a half little jump here and practicing like then leaning back and taking this ball. Um, I would think it works a lot better when we do a full jump over it as well, but at least. In this case where, you know, we're reading a situation and having to get kind of a weird touch. Um, yeah, so basically if you were working on a tip over the block, when we know that we've got a liberal or a position five, like really quite deep, ready for, for, uh, a ball, that's a hard driven, um, we're practicing a situation on controlling this ball to get us into. Hopefully like a really positive situation rather than something that's an emergency situation. Yeah, very clear. Like I, yep. Good. Right. Okay. So we're going to, yeah, now like the same thing will get done at other side of that, but like with, I think you guys are going to do it with one more contact right now. Okay. This already. Yeah. Yeah. Let me go back at that. Um, that's okay. So this is the same and then here you're going to do it with. Yeah. So basically again, this is like experimental because it looked a little bit ridiculous. We've done it several different ways since then. Like another coach will be throwing at the coach. Like, so, um, the coach here is throwing the ball to the net. Basically. They've landed from block or something like this and they turn and they have to play, play a ball, um, that is, you know, flying at them because one of our concepts is land, you know, turn eyes on the ball, like make your transition move, but, you know, locate the ball because maybe it's coming at you and you need to play it and you need to be ready for a really tough second touch. Um, so here we just have the coach just like absolutely throwing the ball at the player and then we're trying to control it on the net so that we can get a touch from it. Um, something else that we've done. Since then, it's like throw the ball at the coach over the playoff and then the coach has dug at themselves. So it's a little bit more live. There was a ball coming over that you have to track. Um, so this was a, that's going to happen right now. Like, I think it does. Great. I think we, uh, maybe if we already made that, that change, that'd be good. Yeah. Yeah. So here we go. We probably felt already in practice that it wasn't the greatest just to throw the ball. So we make an adjustment on that. We look at the ball. We're going to do the opposite side of the table, but we're making a decision on the drill. So she lands. And now opposite, like, has to, has to set the ball here. Ideally she's jumping, but again, it's a morning practice opposite jumps 50 times a game. She needs to just be standing on the ground and then what, what does she need to be doing from a here does she need to be setting? Does she need to be, um, putting the ball straight over, dunking it, ready to block and making those, those kinds of decisions. We do different kinds of second touch drills. And we like. Yeah. We try to. barrier and like test things out like here you know they're turning a little bit too early like i would probably draw it from when we did it the next time we would draw it from a little bit closer um and so you know it becomes a little bit more lifelike again but the main key is again getting a good second touch on the net so that we can get a swing because when we can get a swing we are really dangerous and we don't want to miss these opportunities in a game next one all right uh here we are just moving into a serve and pass like game basically as much as we can we try to put some competitions in most days it's interesting the girls like they get very competitive and you know everything with the competition just has a little bit of a different stress on it also for the server so we we make sure we get enough reps that are without competition so they can just make a bunch of errors try things work on extremes tracking their platform or serving really top and then we also try to put competitions in so this is just timed it's three and a half minutes um and 