what i do in practice i divide the practice in four blocks kind of four blocks right one block is the the warm-up and then just some fun game like whatever like baguette try to start warming up touching the ball a little bit then we go for the second part that is the ball control with a different kind of ball control drills it can be with a little bit more intensity a little bit less intensity it depends we try to change and give different stimulus during the week this is the second block right then the third block we try to go on two courts and and and do like a skill or whatever one side is doing some a little bit of reception and serve another side is doing um connection uh with the hitters you know and then after the fourth part is the game situation where we change a little bit with whatever whatever we want to work on for the game situation so these basically are the the four the four blocks that we use so So that's the first block we were talking about the um first warm-up and this is contacts always you start from five if you win you keep your contacts if you win when you have two contacts the next is one contact and then you go again five four three two one five we try to play with the always try to change the stimulus with either with two balls or you see now they did it in four contacts so in this case they have to discount and that should be three so she should have that attack power yes okay exactly you saw uh start attacking so uh you start with five contacts so every arm uh so when you are bumping or setting these discounts or the first time you get the ball you have five the second time you get the ball you have four so trying to create some different stimulus something that make you think about it like not just bugger like think count whatever so one side we are doing the tempo defense and then a second ball not three balls sorry it's three different so you get a tempo you get a second ball uh second tempo from the coach and that third ball is like kind of a block touch you see we pretend here in the in the court by closer to the camera so it's three three defense not tempo second ball and now which is a reaction ball that gets also you know I like to work that it gets kind of um after touching the block you know that it gets a different spin so you need to work on different angles so pushing differently and and on the other side we're working a drill that we we call two contacts it's just uh you set uh uh you just set and defense and then I think if I'm not wrong they have to they have to go the setter should go and try to cover their own ball when it when it as a target as a target we don't have a hoop we have this uh this um ball right yeah my symbol not like a physical physical the pit ball yes so the defender should go and cover but in this case we are very lucky we are not touching the green fall at all but it should be yeah it should be that the defender goes and try to cover the ball after uh after bounce on the people but yeah this is just like what I was telling you it's a little bit of uh control you see now now we've got it but we were not ready to vote but that's the idea and all I just pulled control a little bit of defense and I I'm a fan of the I'm a fan of working with these reaction things uh either the cover or or the or the second ball on them you know the border is like kind of pretending not blocked touch and changing directions and I'm a fan of that so this is our second second block let's say the first block like I thought is erstmal this fun game and now this is the second block that is the ball control so normally it's no more than 15 minutes 18 minutes what we should have here is serve on one side with alex passing so one group is serving one group of players is serving to one one group of servings players is serving to five on the seam and then on the other side and we wanted to work see that okay uh we work the pipe for the outsides uh i like i said i'm a fan of if you see it's like we pretend that it's a high bowling ball in the block touch and then you see sometimes there's not so much control on the block touch but uh and then the outside hit the transition pipe and with the slide players we were attacking a little bit of line because i was we were attacking a lot diagonal so we just wanted to work on the slide hitting the line that's why we have a another green ball in four on the other side so the line is open so just to work on the line and we had maya trying to work on attacking changing the head up changing her approach so she's approaching in let's say the six try to attack to five if she's approaching in a certain tool is trying to attack to one try to change the approach of uh trying to change the attack on her approach yeah i don't know if you can see that okay you see the pipe data you see now did you see maya attacking you see it maya was approaching from the left to the center and then trying to attack the one right now change here direction right a half time the the middles were serving to one the now we change outside start serving one and and middles are 75. when we change there we change the set that's nice when we change uh the direction of the attack the centers that are setting the middles uh set the outsides and and they said they're setting the outsides go for the minutes now we change the groups libero stay passing and we have the same job yeah at some point the opposite would just attack any system because at some point we were focusing all so much on the on the out of system balls that our percentage was our percentage was very low in system so it was lower than out of system we were attacking worse with the opposites in system than out of system so now there you just have one one ball covered in six and and the opposites attack in system the ball for them is in system and they just need to find the approach and try to find to find the angle there's one coming out important system you see and try to hit line down and the same job here now the the chego and maya should serve too this all the servers from five are serving parallel outside hitters or service from one is 75 then half time they will change and on the other side we change the centers in this case we are trying to create the like i said we are preparing the semifinal and then we are trying to create the two different situations right and we are not working on the rotations specific rotations um but we are working on tendencies of the of the heater so on one side that is the farthest it's tempo free probably right so we are working in system we are not bunch with the outsides because it's uh the the setter was setting a little bit more a tempo her tendency normally was tempo four but the the best hitter was opposite so she was changing a little bit her tendency and she started like with the cold tempo setting everything so on one side we have one team working in system downwards tempo free and on the other side we have uh with the libero creating an out of situation out of system situation right it can be either um with the ball push back or with the ball push front right so depending on what the ball is if it's a always the pipe okay this opposite that i was i i told you that she was dominant so our system when the center was from okay you see exactly you saw now we were trying to focus on when it's pushed for uh when the ball is pushed for the outside heater needs to bunch and and help for the for the pipe attack right and then if the ball is pushed back the right side should uh bunch and help for the pipe right so we wanted to focus a lot because the uh it was my i'm store and uh she was basically the player that it was getting i don't know the the highest amount of balls and the mobile dominant on the most dominant in of the team so we really wanted to focus in at least in our system try to have a better situation or block to to try to stop him so that's why we create the delivery in this case there is choosing if she wants to push the ball too or if she wants to push the ball force so the the both pins have to focus okay if it's into right side or to have to imagine if it's put four that out needs to needs to be ready so what we do there is we we play with some downloads normally we we do three downloads on each side and um and then we choose score that is in this case 24 24. so if you win you reduce one point you discount one point on your board if you win the point you reduce one point and sorry no you reduce one point on the opponent and or so at the end you have score whatever it's 24 20 when you start 24 24 normally three or four downloads on each side so at the end you can have score 19 21 something like that and then we do normal side out so so basically the preparation for the opponent is that with the downloads which is not just preparation it's also competition right something that i do there is uh if you can see when you see the practice i don't have a lineup i rotate all the players okay so uh uh so um uh uh I don't like, I like a lot of competition and I like that both teams are balanced. Okay, in this case, we did a sometimes, I mean, there's not so much difference between players. So either player can play in the lineup. But I try that just if something happened and another player have to come on the court, that she's used to play with absolutely everybody. You know, if it's an outside, I'm used to pass with my liver. I'm used to block with this liver. So normally I have a rotation situation where everybody, absolutely everybody will play with everybody. So now we start stealing down balls. No, probably we finished. No, we are still with the down balls, I think. Yes. So you see the liver, in this case, Kappa 2. So you see Anet have to be, you saw. So the ball is pushed back. So the right side have to focus on helping on the pipe. Yeah. And then again, tempo free. Yeah. So it was tempo free. The job of the day was a tempo free and in and out of system pipe. And yeah, see pipe again. The right side should focus. In this case, she touched the ball. That was success, let's say. And yeah, that was the focus for the game situation. And then after you create this, you create this, all these situations. Okay. You don't really need to go rotation per rotation because this is basically the tendency. They do with the attackers or two attackers in system and out of system. So you don't really have to, you don't really have to go rotation per rotation unless there is something unusual or specific in, in any of the rotations. Not normally the two rotations that they can have something a little bit different, especially in woman is a third one. It normally would be the opposite in four, the outside in two, like. They, they might have something different, uh, compared to the five or the six and then set them to, if, uh, if the middle block gave a, um, the place far can go slide. Okay. Then we treat the same, but sometimes, for example, our middle Maya and doesn't go, she doesn't go. So we stay with special, whatever they do in setup to, uh, with the middle middle blocker going from. Yeah. And the main. Time that you're at the side of the, yeah, now it's side up part. I don't know. I can not see from here. So they, they compete with the down balls and, and, and then you have score. So normally what I do is, uh, what I told you before, like the, the, uh, the team that has the lowest score, uh, can choose if they want to set or, or fast and normally you should ask, but you never know. So I was choosing them just to, uh, just out of my curiosity is a set of choosing or, or I choose, I choose different companies and then they do the rock paper scissors. And if it's a diet, if it's the, if the score is tied, it, if not, yeah, sometimes I choose, I, I choose different, let's say captains. How many of these kind of like, uh, situations plus side of blocks can you do, or you just go for timing? You go for like, okay, now we did another repetition and. You can do it. You can do it four to eight times, you can do it four to eight times. It depends on, on how long is the side out situation drill, what, whatever you, if you want to side out more, uh, if you, if you put a, a higher score, uh, but for sure, what I want is that, uh, all the outside hitters rotate with all the setters, uh, and both setters play, uh, uh, both calls. No. So at least. One set that have to play, uh, two times, at least with both opposites, um, uh, the temp, let's say in this case, tempo free and on the other side, uh, uh, the out of system, both setters have to do it at least two times. So normally it's an even is even, it's like either four rotations or eight rotations here. You see now Madison is on the other side, right? So Madison is doing the tempo four, right? You see, doing the tempo, sorry, the tempo free. Uh, and then Sarah is working on the out of system. This is important. And, uh, and I think I fixed, I was fixing exactly for the pipe. I left, uh, uh, beyond that is the coach, the guy that he also played. I mean, uh, we are getting all old, but, uh, she used to play first league and, and he can, he, he helped us a lot. And so for this situation, we, we try to, we, we let him, uh, fix that. Yeah. Six, always for the pipe out of system. So all the players were rotating, except he, he was for the pipe. Yeah. Like you said, it depends on the injury. Of course, her problem, if I don't remember wrong, was her knee. For sure. All the, uh, eccentric movements and all this, uh, isometric, uh, would hurt her a lot, uh, staying down. So, but standing is okay. So you are just trying to work a little bit on angles. You see that she has the cones to go short diagonal then. Uh, so she's, she's. She's working on her wrist away there a little bit. Then probably after she will work on the, on her crossbody hitting to one, you see the cones there. No. Yeah. And, um, and then after the, after that we are working like what, what I told you before, she, she's not used to open up to pass. She's trying to get always, she was trying to get always the, the ball in the middle of her body and not out of her line. And, and we exactly there. Yeah. So now Ricardo is just trying to. To try to pass a little bit, uh, to toss her quick on the side and maybe now is in the middle of the, on her line. No, yes, exactly. But now she, you just trying to, but, uh, being in a isometric position with, with her, a little bit her knee more. So we put just this chair with the wheels and she is here for her to open up a little bit. So just trying to do something to be productive and then don't waste, uh, so much time with the feeling of the. Yeah. But like you said before, like the, the fact that you're injured doesn't mean that you can not do anything unless it's like a really big injury, right? Yeah, it's, it's always, I think also the talking, also talking about myself and how players go about it, it's, it's always a small mental factor. Like, like even if you do this and you've, for example, you have pain in your knee, you can still feel it, you know? So you're always scared of is what I'm doing. Not too much, but yeah, you have to do something. Yeah. And now, yeah, we see her spike in line. Yeah. And then the last part is that she is more on the body. I think that you serve that she doesn't have to move, but you serve on the body. Yeah. You see, like just the transfer of the work on the chair and trying now, I think it kind of is serving right and left to try to open and pass out of her line. And it's okay. Now she's serving from the other side. It's nice though, that you've all these people that are able to, to help and to hit. Yeah. I understand that it's not every, every team can have like three coaches, you know what I mean? We were lucky this season because the husband of our libero, he was coaching our men team, but he had a lot of free time, so he was coming to help us a lot. So we were basically four guys in practice, every practice that can attack and serve, have volleyball knowledge because all of us have volleyball knowledge. Our athletic trainer is a full-time athletic trainer, but he's also assistant coach. He played third league in, in, in Greece, Ricardo, also our Italian scout is also the assistant coach. And he's, he was set that in Italy, in the youth, in, in youth ages, ages. So we are lucky. We are lucky that the team is lucky that you can have four guys and just put two guys on each side of the court and, and, and still work. You know, sometimes you have an injured player and you just have one or two coaches and you cannot really dedicate so much time to the injured player. During the team practice, you just have to find another time to, to work with her. 