Often Thursday, we do something about the opponent of next weekend.
Here, we just wanted our guys, the first ball that is on the game,
you have to tip or push.
Because the opponent of that weekend uses a huge amount of pushes,
especially from position four, but also the middle blockers.
So we wanted just us to get ready for that kind of game.
Then you see also, like it happens, many balls are going down.
We are not always reacting like we should.
And when you play against these kind of teams,
the game can be very frustrating when someone plays fast and does it very well.
Ball goes down, we start to move our hands in the block,
trying to reach.
Then it's blocked out.
And also, that is the key.
So here, our middle didn't understand the exercise yet.
He had to push, so we have to restart.
Here is also some factor that, because I have always a translator here,
from English to Japanese, and maybe I said something too fast,
so we have to restart.
So exactly this.
If you go back there,
yes, so now we wanted our position one to go up,
like Brizard is doing here.
Then our position four, Lopez is in four.
With him and with Bagunas, that are our physical spikers,
we wanted them to come to defend their short diagonal.
And in that case, Libero should move for that push.
And when the other two spikers that are so-called more defensive,
spikers, they had to move towards the position four
to take the push and tip,
because probably we don't need their transistor to attack
as much as their defense in that game.
And what I always say in these situations is,
if we take those first two, three tips or pushes up,
then the spikers on the other side, they change their idea.
They see, man,
this team was prepared and they start to use other solution,
more spiking solution.
So the beginning of the game is very important.
And now after saying we managed to do that quite well in the game
and then could control their attacks when the setter has the ball.
So you see now our position four is exactly on the tape.
The position four blocker is on that tape.
Middle is staying in the middle, not moving.
Position two is not ready like he should be.
He should be a little bit more down,
but he has the tape between his legs.
Then the ball goes shoot over and we wanted to practice defense against the tip.
Then the other side and the other side who is in position four goes in defense.
He was the other player that had to move directly towards the push from position four.
Let's see what happens.
So he moves very well now what we wanted him to do in the game.
If this happens,
if you go on a little bit.
Yeah, so he that's what we we we wanted to do.
This is a good moment that we wanted to have in the game.
But Lopez and Bagunas,
so our offensive spikers,
we wanted to stay then them to stay normally in defense because we need their
transition at that captain.
