you
you
you
we're just doing a six first six forced out of system drill so we're going to the center
we're chasing the ball down plant it off the net just to give our
um
um
attackers a lot out of system reps and also get better at blocking and all that
and we we talked a lot about um we're trying to get our basically our especially our freshmen
our younger players to make some better decisions you know i have three freshmen that are pin
players and some of the decision making um but they they decide uh to make our
questionable at best you know they're just kind of blasting the block or hit low and hard and so
just trying to force them and look just really really trying to create teaching opportunities
and opportunities to kind of in the moment talk about what we're trying to work on here
this is a new drill for these guys a lot of these guys this is like week two or whatever so it was
shaky at best but but we like forcing our players that have to make high ball sets too you know so
um that skill is is important especially our little barrows and but everyone running around
chasing it it's uncomplicated drill but a lot of opportunities to teach i think exactly no like it
was also pretty long and i think like there was a lot of value in like starting at the practice
and just like like let kids play you know and figure it out it's a high ball you can figure
stuff out once in a while you stop exercising you tell them look this shot was maybe better
than the one you took now you have 10 more opportunities to try the shot you know and go
from exactly yeah and we spend we spend a lot of our early parts of practices doing games like this
not always out of system but mostly out of system games you know whether it's just like a set or
dig the whole time or something so yeah we've spent a lot of our early part or
getting part of our practice playing a lot of these games to just create like you said like
you're talking about a lot of opportunities to fail a lot of opportunities to work on things
and a lot of opportunities to teach trying to create those opportunities for us to teach
it's still the same exercise it's just like yeah just at this moment it just looks a bit
smoother because we're 10 minutes in and the hard thing is of course do you remember what
you said there that's the not at all yeah like i think you're going to talk about a chicken spike
with her or that she can like drop it to one yeah i think i was talking about oh i was talking about
if we are out of rhythm so if we don't have we can't attack with a chance to score like where
to put the ball like give it the setter's back row or um to drop it to the to the off blocker
you know and just like make some decisions i think i don't know for sure i probably talked
too long at this especially this time of year we try to create kind of as much chaos as we can in
this so they have to kind of they have to create order you know i think that's one of the things
like this is a less chaotic than some of the journals will do we'll do like a like little
kid volleyball or right back or left back always sets and create a lot of system plays there and
create chaos so they have to communicate that the problem solved and all that on the fly
um just like you're saying like to create as much opportunity for failure as possible
and so that they can kind of sort through all that stuff and learn how to problem solve
so i i love that part of practice actually so much every parts of practice
i like in this set of
and this this first bigger exercise season six like is there some scoring system because i saw
them like do the jumping jacks yeah yeah we just do a little quick yeah it's uh it's i think we're
playing to seven or five i can't remember just like a little short little games just alternating
out the system balls yeah here we're talking about how our freshmen don't really know how
to transition you know from hips facing where the direction we want to go they all want to
face the court when they transition so opening their hips up to the direction we want to get off
the court we want to go to the right so we're right here we're working on three hitters front
or commit uh and introducing it like so meaning that if the the pass the middle you know is in the
gap zone of the 31 zone but we're going to shift over uh commit meaning that we're going to just
jump on it right away so that's the language that we use for that so we're working on those calls
and and then how it should look blocking wise and then we're working on a two hitter
just either going to the outside or going to the with the middle on the slide um and what how when
and how we want to move on that so and then you'll see later that we take this we put it in a six
six person defense so we'll have like a live attacking we'll do this with blocking and then
we'll move that into where we're actually doing it and trying to transition out of it and understand
the defense behind it just installing all of our system stuff basically yeah
still explanation i will skip one minute and then
yeah that's gonna be something awesome and with stanford kids man there's a lot of why
there's a lot of questions which i i'm okay with that they're asking a bunch to make sure
they understand which i like you know other teams that coach they we tell them what to do they go
try it then they ask questions these guys ask a bunch of questions before which i like a lot
actually they get into it so and then once they understand they understand it pretty well actually
that's that's an interesting point like um how much of your time are you spending
i don't want to say in like preparing practice but in preparing like
um preparing into knowing what kind of questions they're going to ask you
or yeah i mean i think now i'm used now i'm ready for whatever i think i've done it enough that i
kind of have an idea what the questions they're going to ask are but here they're just like
they're just asking a lot to make sure they understand okay and then they fast
they will fast forward and be like all right well what about this situation and what about
this situation and what about that they're just trying to understand it's actually really cool
i really like the communication it takes a little bit longer but we're better at the end because it
kind of solidifies so i think i've gotten so used to answering these questions all the time that i'm
kind of prepared for whatever so right there we're working on a commit which we don't do very much
but you saw mckenna's our middle and she's she's getting in front and she's making a commit on the
middle which is something that we honestly we haven't done a lot of we've had to do it a couple
times here this year actually already but it's not something that we we like to be in a read a lot
more so that's that's that's that's that's that's that's that's that's that's that's that's that's that's
yeah but you know like when you face that little whatever in the latest stage in season and have to
do the commits better to have prepared it right now already exactly and there's some teams that
every time it's perfect it's that quick you know and so like i think understanding when like we
talked about things in perfect perfect when it's not like like right on the center's hand inside
three feet they'll sometimes they'll set quick a lot and then we want our so we're going to need
to have that in place and then we also one of the things that we're not doing a great job of this
that we start we're starting to get better at is when we're one-on-one as blockers making big moves
like outside of our shoulders even trying to get them to do that but at this point we're really just
trying to get the middles to do what we want and everyone to understand what the responsibilities
are because this is just putting this stuff in place right you see that she made a good move so
it's as much about the commit as it is about being one-on-one as blockers on the outside too and
understanding um that's going to be a little bit different than when you have a middle closing to
you potentially
yeah for sure like i'm i'm a stranger to like most of your athletes names but your setter like
it's like she she could be a nasty blocker one against one really difficult to like read because
i what i just told you and it was super funny that you didn't answer like i just said like um
you're starting setter because you you were talking about blocking you know blocking one-on-one
yeah like they have the freedom to also do that and i was just saying like yeah no i i guess what
i've seen just from a few games
and just from seeing your practice that you're starting centers she could normally block one
against one you're like and then you didn't you didn't say anything on that and i was like okay
that's weird whatever i actually did say i actually was saying stuff that's the part that's
crazy i was like yeah she's actually probably our best blocker she's in some way she's better than
kendall she's more consistent than kip which is funny and then i was like i feel like i was
talking and then all of a sudden i'm like you didn't i stopped and you didn't say anything
i'm like oh maybe it was exactly the same experience from my end too we can go through
the next one i think um you just inserted like a really short penalty hitting exercise here you
know but yeah it's a little overpass it's cool for people to see so here we just we do these
little things it's kind of like uh you know in the army i guess or something we have like there's
these jewels called pocket they do like pocket drills where they have all these things they
can teach while they're in training that are just these little three minute five minute two minute
kind of things that they do where they look to try to teach
whatever they can in this short little period of time so i've kind of taken that concept and
we'll just do it around practice a little bit like between drills we just do a little bit overpass
because i feel like a lot of times we don't work on overpasses so just to do it for three minutes
like before we jump into the next drill that seemed to work out pretty well for us and give
us some reps so we can talk through some same things and just make sure we're trying to teach
all the little things and this will kind of rotate through we'll do you know balls out of the net
we'll do um you know wiping we'll do all kinds of things just like little five minutes here five
minutes little agreed death is a little bit get to work you know hitting the ball really quickly
a little bit control so i like to a lot of these little drills a lot of chances to teach just
looking for chances to teach exactly uh and it's also nice just to let everybody hits you know
also like defensive specialists yeah just one whatever like have fun just just crush it yeah
we would play yeah we play a lot of games where ds is gonna hit and they just go for it they go for
broke it's pretty fun actually
you see there's a break now and then i look yeah tell me give me a second
now we have team defense is coming up this the drill we're jumping in this drill is probably
the drill we do most consistently like just about every practice we do some kind of derivative this
when we're working on like for here this one because we just talked about the blocking stuff
the front the commitment and the trapping we um we're putting that into you know with the six
six versus six kind of situation so um you know but it could be that we're just we're working on
a different combination you know like a slide back or we're working on a overload situation
trying to get better blocking it so we can do a lot of like i guess initial problem solving uh
as with our with our defense and understanding how we want to solve these problems you know like
when we read this and we see this like how do we want to respond to that we spend quite a bit
we spent some time in this drill um implementing those things the blocking was teaching the
blockers and now we're talking about what do we want to do with the defense and how do we need
to change our base defense
and uh based on what the block's doing if they are on a commit or if they are on the front
and then what changes we're in the trap and then what you know we talk about what the blockers
need to do but what do we need to expect as defensive players if they are committing another
one-on-one how's that change and what kind of moves are we going to make as blockers we'll
spend about half this in three hitter and then half of this in two hitter and this one we're
working on the fronts commits and then we get into the two hitter a little bit later i think we just
yeah we kept it it's um just slide
go in the first one where we're trapping either the go or trapping just the um the middle on the
slide and then uh after that we read so just the first play do we do the call and then the rest of
it we kind of do our normal our base system if you will just to read this here's the front
and then here we're back to this we're going to read
and that's kind of the drill but we get three ends to the front and then we're back to the
system and then one hand system just want to constantly work at the out of system stuff as well
both attacking and defensively and do you have a scoring system here or
we're just we're going to a number we're going to a number we're going to 15 stops so a stop for
us is an in rhythm attack or a stuff yeah a block so if we just get a swing it doesn't
count it's got to be a swing that we feel like we can score on for it to count
we're just keeping a little talent on our
scoreboard or whatever when we get to 15.
And that's it.
I'm going to skip ahead to
the same exercise,
but I think you're going to implement a fly or a slider
like you just said.
Yeah, we did that a little bit later.
We're working on what we call the trap
where we're just going to send the players.
It's about halfway through this.
So yeah, now we're working on
just two hitters.
You see the middle is going right away
with the slide.
That's a call that she made, and we're working to do that defensively.
And then now she's reading,
and she's going to read and react.
And we add the back row because
if they have a good back row to attack,
then we're probably not going to trap in the middle of a match.
But there's a lot of teams
that don't have that that we play in the league,
so it's nice to have this call.
But we're actually, in this, we're letting them.
The middle's actually, like we're not dictating what they call.
They're making the call on just
the first ball, and then
the next two that they're reading and reacting to.
And then the last one, obviously,
is another out-of-system ball.
And then I'm spending lots of time
on their eyes
and what they're looking at and making sure we're looking at the right things
and then when to take off.
Our backcourt
working on positioning.
Mike, who's
wandered around back there with two balls in his hand
is working on positioning and making sure
they recognize what's happening in front of them
as well.
I guess also that your
middle appreciates
like a short breeder, because I only saw
two in this practice.
There's two. Yeah, we had one injured right now.
So two, we had a, this is a little bit slower
than we normally do it with only two middles,
which is kind of a bummer, but it is what it is.
It's preseason.
It's what happens.
Exactly. I was checking
the length of the exercise and of the practice
and I was like, these girls must be
completely finished.
I'm just like percent flat, percent fine
because I was a middle, you know, that's the only
otherwise I wouldn't figure that out for sure.
Yeah.
No, we, I mean, we're also trying to build
load this time of year, you know, like try
to get it so we can handle the season.
And we're pretty scientific
about that as far as like, we know what the load is and
trying to get to a certain number.
And because the pace is a little bit
slower, we had to go a little bit longer
than we normally do to get the load
where we want it.
Are you guys doing something high tech with like the
accelerator?
Or the barometer things?
Yeah, we're wearing this called
Connexon. It's Connexon we're
wearing and
we actually, yeah, it gives us a load
number and there's
some satellite tracking stuff
that happens too where it tells where everyone is
on the cord at all times, like it tracks it in real
time. Probably you know about Connexon, but
we haven't figured out a way to
use that. We have all the data and it's
sitting in files, but we haven't figured out
a way to use that. But to get
the number of jumps, to get the
basic load number, that's just
kind of an arbitrary number that they've created
is probably the most
important. But then to look at jumps, to look
at accelerations, decelerations, collisions,
like all those kind of things. We
look at that all very carefully and we
are very
we are very
deliberate about trying to
get to like a 1.1 ratio of
acute load over chronic
load, meaning one week over four weeks.
And like right now we're at
exactly a 1.1. So we've been like a
I just got the report today after the last match
and that's a, you know, a running
seven day over 28
day like ratio. So we're right at the 28
day mark right now. And that's
we get a good sense of what's going on.
We're close to the 28 day mark right now.
So we have a good sense of kind of where we're at
from a load standpoint.
And it's important for us. And I actually write practice
to a predicted load
and we try to hit a load for every
practice.
It's a fun puzzle.
Exactly. It could be
worthwhile for you guys, maybe, maybe for
like for next season or after the season, whatever.
There's more time to talk with
another
with Vani, Vani Miale.
This is the physical
prep guy of Vakibang, who's also like one
of the assistant coaches of the Korean
national team. And
they are very deep
inside Kinexon and
like the XLR meter, like I think
they have US
players.
I really saw
some of their data, like
they can really figure out,
okay, not always for sure.
There are like edge cases,
but like
when it's about
let me explain it there.
From the moment that an athlete starts to put more pressure
on one leg or the other, when there's something
off, whatever, some ligament stuff,
some tendon stuff, whatever,
they know that. They see that.
Yeah.
And so for them, that's a signal like,
okay, this is something that we have to take care of.
It's still, it falls
under the umbrella of prevention.
It's not actually because something is wrong already.
But like
if you look at volleyball
five years ago or ten years ago, it's still prevention.
It's still way before the injury
actually happens.
Those are really important
stats and things to know.
I agree.
I mean, we're doing things with force plates
that give us similar things. Like every Monday,
they jump on force plates and it tells
us the balances, how they're landing,
also how much force out,
what they're putting in. So we're seeing how
they're responding to the training.
My performance director is
very, very good. He runs the Olympic
performance here.
We're talking about a lot of
similar things and what we need to do.
So I
feel fortunate because
you're right. Five years ago, though, we wouldn't
be able to do a lot of these things. Ten years ago,
we wouldn't be able to do a lot of these things. I think it serves
the athletes very well.
So here, our middle, she
has to go high a lot. She gets up
here or is reaching
out and not getting over and reaching
out. Or reaching over and
closing the block. And so
just trying to get her to get over fast. Again, right there,
she's just late getting over.
And so we're just trying to get her to get over quicker.
Force it a little bit.
Not that complicated.
No, it's not complicated, but
it's usually, like I see here,
it takes a while for
her to know.
She did it right there.
There's a really good example of,
of course, top player, Zeta Güneş.
The game that just ended between
Turkey and Poland.
Güneş, she didn't serve. She didn't
really spike. The only thing she did was
just go over as a beast.
Stopping where you are, going over.
And your middle here has the same
characteristics, like long arms.
Tall player.
We watch Güneş a lot for her.
Her and I watch Güneş.
Because I think Güneş is so good at closing fast.
She has the ability to do that too, this kid.
Because she's
a pretty mobile kid.
She's 6'6 and she's mobile.
We just got to get her over quicker.
When she does that, she's a beast.
They're young. They're figuring it out.
Going through it.
This game, we want to go in-system, out-of-system.
So we're concerned about
some of our outside's ability
just to score.
I guess it's a block where they know it's set up.
A big deal in volleyball.
Especially out-of-system.
Just talking about decision making.
Giving them opportunities to learn how to
tool the block, hit the space.
Defense on the
attackers are
not often.
They're going to stay for the same two balls.
But they're going to change quite a bit.
So the players have to look and recognize
what defense they're playing against them.
But the drill is basically
a ball where they play an in-system ball
and then an out-of-system ball.
In order for the outsides
to get a point,
it's all the outsides working together.
They have to score two in a row.
They have to get a kill on the in-system and
they have to get a kill on the out-of-system.
And then for the defense to get a point,
they have to get two stops, basically.
They have to create a swing and they have to get a block.
Same with the defensive rules.
But just trying to work through the outsides.
Finding ways to score, really.
And then challenging them.
Again, it gives me a lot of opportunities to talk about.
Almost every time.
Not every time, but almost every time.
We're talking about stuff and the choice
and what they're doing and what they're going for.
I'll ask them a lot of questions here.
Like, what were you going for in this swing?
What did you see? Where were they playing defense?
Just to try to get them thinking about the game.
Mostly to recognize block and defense
and where are the spaces
that we can actually get kills.
I hope that makes sense.
But that's the game.
Pretty straightforward.
I think it's worthwhile to just go back
and to check out
the spike that just happened.
The mistake that was made.
Error was made.
It's a really worthwhile explanation to give.
You're going to remember when you see it.
I remember this one for sure.
I know exactly.
So, that swing right there.
I feel like that's a problem
that a lot of outsides have.
At least in our gym.
Maybe other people have this solved.
But when players see the line and they want to go line,
I guess people say pinky down.
In our country, I don't love that terminology,
but they almost cut it.
The reality is that it opens them up for a lot of errors.
It's also hard to control it
and it has less power.
I'd rather see our players
this is what I'm talking about here.
I'm talking about taking it off
the pinky or the ring finger
of the outside blocker.
And to do that, it's a lot easier to
thumb down and go the opposite way
and finish that direction like I just demonstrated.
Where they're kind of finishing this way on the ball.
But also, we create a little bit more power.
Less room for error.
And then it's almost like they're just giving a high five
to the outside blocker's hand.
So, that's one of the things we're talking about a lot.
Is just trying to
attack high
off those last two fingers,
but not cross this way
or this way.
Or at least straight.
I like it even coming back into the court just a little bit.
Too many players make that mistake.
It's my least favorite swing.
That was better.
I'll just say this.
Some of the things that we're working on as attackers
is we're working on hitting off
the outside hand of the outside blocker
and the outside hand of the middle blocker.
Just like
the swing before where she got it off
the middle blocker's hand and we got good deflections.
But same thing with those last two fingers.
A taming for there. We get a lot of kills
in that space. And trying to hit there.
Obviously, she got that in the bigger part of her hand
so it's a better deflection.
We're talking about how a ball typically reacts.
Obviously, there's things that
sometimes the ball reacts different than we expect it to
for whatever reason, but we talk a lot about
if we can get these last couple fingers
of the outside blocker's hand, whether that's
the middle or the outside, we get a lot of points
on that. And then we can take it off
the other two fingers off the middle
in the cross court space.
That's some of the stuff, the shots
that they're working on with the double block on that.
Ipar, who just hit that ball, she got it
into the thumb and forefinger and we talk about that's
going to be good. We're going to be able to recycle that.
That's fine. But if you want
to score, you're going to have to get off those last two fingers.
And in this drill, actually, if they do cover,
so if we do get her to recycle a ball on the block and cover,
that still counts as a chance for her point.
So she's probably going right there.
She's going for that shot. But one of the things
I don't like about the way she hit that is that she
fell away from it as opposed to
going through it with her shoulder and getting some rotation.
And typically, players, when they do
that, they kind of go away from the
swing when they're hitting the cross.
They end up sailing the ball deep
and missing the block. We'd rather see them
finish more like Kendall just did right there,
which is the rotation of the shoulders through the ball.
It's the same kind of concept. They're
one-on-one against the block
and they have to figure out ways to get kills and connect.
Yeah, it's not complicated.
It was 10 kills to 10
stops.
Let's watch a few actions.
I'm going to put in
my specs of them and then
skip into the next one.
Yeah, the
defense is changing a little bit, but we're working
on hitting
different shots, especially getting the
two-to-two shot, bringing a hard cross
for Sami and getting a
ball that she can do that on.
McKenna is a little bit,
our other middle is a little bit deep. He doesn't play pretty
fast. And it's good if she's
moving around. So just trying to
figure out how to differentiate those two
stats, give Kami or Sid or
a lot of opportunities to get them balls in good
situations. And then those guys
again, think about how to score instead of
just how to hit.
And we're trying to get them to
hit the space, but also take it
off the block when
the blocks are kind of the same idea as we're doing with the
outsides. Not kind of, the exact same idea as
the outsides. So this game is
it's simple,
a little bit of a weighted game for
the starting side. We'll
be the starting side, so the other side of the net,
from
where we're looking right now. It's
basically a serve, and then
the other team sends a free ball, and then
they have to serve. And the way it's scored
is that the team
that receives first, or would be our starting side,
has to win all three to get a point,
and the team that's on the defensive side to start has
to win two to get a point. And so
just trying to put some pressure on us
to execute at a high level,
but also side out,
take care of the ball, and then come around and have to
score a point on our serve immediately
to even give ourselves a chance.
I mean, that's the drill.
The things we're working on in
this drill, I think this is how it is for me
a lot, is that we create these drills that are
a way to score and put them in situations
that we're just looking for to
create opportunities to continue to work on
the things we're working on already. You know, like we're
talking about scoring and
outsides hitting certain shots, so
really, at this point, I'm looking at a lot of
that. Like, what are the decisions
we're making? How are we trying to attack?
Are we hitting the shots to give us
success? You know, all those kind of things.
That's where I'm kind of
on high alert in this part
of the practice. Obviously, if we get
pulled into some offensive
stuff or some other things,
we'll address those, but that's the main
focus of this drill, is to take
the things we're working on
and work on them in this
scenario. It's a live scenario.
This drill, I mean, it's obviously just
pretty simple. Just a bunch of set of reps going off the
pass. We're just working on trying to keep
the ball. So that ball right there is happening a lot
for us, where the ball is dying at the
point of attack for our drunk go.
And the players are just trying to keep
going from high to keep it high, and
then, you know, keep it in a
position where it's high enough for
attackers to use the physicality
that they have. And Alex,
you saw, like, the ball is kind of flat
on a couple of those, and so Alex is bringing this
hoop over, so they have to actually
set over that hoop to make
sure it ends up high enough and kind of has
the right trajectory, like it would be over
a gap set
to make sure that it gets in
like lands kind of in the right space.
So, not a
complicated drill, but, you know, just using some of this
target to make sure
that they understand how high it's supposed to be.
That's pretty much it.
But keeping it high to high is, yeah,
that's better said already. But keeping it high
to high is what we're looking for
for the hands. They want to bring their hands down
and try to get it high. The ball ends up being
loopy as opposed to playing with
some tempo. But already that's a better
set, so good job, Alex,
getting that thing in there. It worked out pretty well.
I think in a moment,
because now the second hoop is a bit
short, I think she's going to
put it down. Yeah, she brings it up a little, yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah, that's just her evaluating
obviously what the shape of the set looks
like and making sure
that it's the right, so.
Exactly.
Yeah.
We do this every day, some of this like
every day in the preseason. We'll do a little bit
of it. We'll break it up a little bit
during season and put
that in one big practice. Because we go
away from two-a-days once we get into school.
But we'll get reps like this
and working through problems.
We try to mix this stuff in for like 15, 20 minutes
every day, even
when we're not in that two-a-days, just to
get some reps and really to problem
solve, a lot of opportunities to problem solve.
We were working on the,
we had a similar problem. Yeah, that's right.
We had a similar problem with, we're trying
to set a gap set. So like we call, this is
actually our gap, but the men call it
a 30, but a back row set in the
gap zone. And
they were having trouble figuring out the height of it.
They were setting it way too fast in
the scrimmage stuff that we're playing.
And so Alex was like, hey, I bet if
they hit it that they'll
understand it's really hard to hit the way
they're setting it. And so she had them hit
a few balls and then it got a whole lot better
coming into it. So again, another
nice way to problem solve by Alex.
And it's about keeping it high to high
on this as well. So that's why she had
them go on that route and see what it was about.
I think the next day we actually hit it
more. That was showing them kind of what we
wanted to work on. And the next day it didn't get better
in the scrimmage. And so they, we worked
on it a little bit more later.
Obviously, Kelly,
our little setter, is not going to be an attacker
for us, but we thought it was good for her
to kind of get a sense of,
and for both of them to get a sense of what it's like to hit.
Kind of some empathy for what our hitters are going
through on the sets that they're giving them. Because they're
almost impossible to hit.
Too low and fast.
Yeah, we can
not let your other setter spike.
Yeah, she could spike.
That kid could hit her.
They could be hit her.
Yeah.
These were the ones that I watched in the weekend
with my wife and she was like, she's setting.
What?
Yeah, no, she was,
if she wanted to be an
attacker, she could be an attacker. But she's already
in Karchin's gym and all that in the summer as well.
She's pretty good.
That's a good set.
Yeah, she's a good set.
That's a pretty good hit right there.
Yeah.
What are we doing now? We're working on back setting.
The rest is back setting.
Oh, we're working on the D. Yeah, we're working on Ds.
Set the D ball. I don't know what you guys call it,
but the position one attack.
Ah, okay, so it's the back row position one.
This is actually a sky. Yeah, this is a sky.
This is actually between one and
six, a little seven.
Kind of similar to what Hawk runs
with the slide.
So they run the slide and then she runs in between that
and the setter.
Kendall's hitting a lot of those.
And it looks like we're mixing it up between
D and sky, D and sky.
And making sure we keep it high enough for Kendall.
Yeah, that's definitely the sky right there.
And just getting a feel for that.
This is more of like,
but definitely more of like, instead of rep,
kind of like a tutor to get a feel.
And then later in the week,
later in the week,
we do a lot more
like just getting a lot of reps
after we get a feel for it.
Most coaches call this
the team that I know to play this
because you need, of course,
you need the opposite to be able to
be efficient on that.
They call it an X.
An X. That makes sense.
Yeah, that makes sense.
It's a nice little play for us.
It opens up Sammy a little bit.
Keeps the left front guessing a little bit. It's been really efficient on it.
Even last night,
that was one of our more efficient sets.
We have found that getting on a box like,
hey, a hard forces the angle
as opposed to just a serve.
Like if we get on it and get on it faster,
they have to get on,
they have to get in the angle a little bit earlier.
So just getting prepared,
I think, oh man, that's a terrible pass.
But getting their arms out to the side
and just like, and tracking on the side.
One of the things that we've learned,
at least the way the serving's going,
we can take too many in the chest.
It's just hard. So we have to make sure we're on at least our hip.
We want to get on the side and then
we really want to stay loose
in the angle. Like we want to be in the angle
early and loose, not tight.
And then only tighten
as we're
ready to make contact with the ball
so we can finish that pass. And sometimes we have to give
a little bit and sometimes we have to take away.
But right now you're seeing a bunch of guys
pretty early on trying to figure out how to get in that angle
early and then stay loose in that angle
and then to really finish that pass.
And that's why we're on a box
hammering it and then we add a live ball
just because it's nice to get the
combination of both of those.
So that's what we're working on.
For the people watching,
I've never talked to the third person
but for the people watching, this is also nine minutes
into this practice so
if they're not worried, that's what it is.
Yeah, they're struggling a little bit right here.
But we're just, yeah, I think
we spend so much time, like movement and all that stuff
is fine, we get into that.
But I think we spend so much time
just trying to work on angles
and just being good with angles.
It's a really hard skill to learn.
I don't know if you find that, but that's what we've found.
No, they're leaving too many passes through area two
and their angle
that they're creating in our terminology
is
that they're all leaving it
to the right front in that area.
And we're saying, hey, get in more to the middle
because we want to open up. We have a good right side attack,
we have a good flat attack, we'd rather be in the middle of the court
or even past the middle of the court
so that we can
spread things out a little bit.
And then also, it gives us
more space for room for error
if we make a mistake. Like, if you're over or past it,
it's going to give us more space.
And so, just trying to create that angle
a little bit more in that space so that they can play it.
And our setters are mobile enough
and good enough to be able to take balls from
closer to area four
and still be able to set everything. So we'd rather be
in that situation than kind of
convolute what we're doing on the right side of the court.
Well, I guess this was in general.
Just like b3, b6 from the middle
also, or maybe they escaped before.
No. Yeah, anything that was short.
We don't really have the problem when it's deep,
but it's more like when it's short. So they're coming up on like a drop serve
or a shorter serve throughout the outsides.
Like, just to create more space.
But if we pass it right there, we're fine.
We're on this side of the net, closest to us.
Elia just passed that ball.
We're fine with it being a little bit to the right.
It's not a big deal, but it's the ones that are short
we end up passing almost right directly into.
And then we can't run the slide.
We can't do the things that we want to.
So that's all.
I think here you're receiving
nearly at the end.
You're receiving with your starting six line
on the rack with the receivers
and then there's some sending.
Yeah, just rotation stuff.
Just working through our rotations.
And making sure that they get comfortable with each other.
And working through seams and all that.
So we try to, you know,
I guess we approach passing like a
we post it individually, but we also want to approach it
like a team system.
We understand how they get used to each other.
And so we try to spend
quite a bit of time
well, a little bit of time
every day just working on just this passing.
And then
obviously get a bunch of setting reps.
And then you see Cammy, our setter,
is working through the same stuff that she was working on
like high to high and making sure the go
is in the right space.
And we get to use these great cameras right here
so that she can watch the set and kind of self-evaluate
which I like a lot.
That's the best tool, obviously, for teaching.
Because they think something looks like something
or it feels a certain way
and then they watch it
and they're like, oh man, that's nothing like I thought it felt.
And I think that's one of our best tools that we have
is all that video.
It could be a crutch if you overuse it,
but it definitely has been a nice tool for us.
No, I really like something I noticed
from the first
video clips that I watched.
I think it's a great tool.
It's amazing that you have so many and that you haven't
and that you have them and use them
in every exercise also.
Even just the basic setting, whatever stuff
that we just watched.
Why not have it?
It can always be that you would like to check something
and then it's there and you use it.
I mean, we use it
along the net to look at blocking.
We could do picture-in-picture
and we could have the backcourt with a picture-in-picture
and we watch that.
And so you get to see the blockers
and the play from a coach's angle
like this angle.
Sometimes our libero will want to put it
behind them and left back so that they can see
their positioning outside the block.
Sometimes right back will want to do that.
It's nice to
be able to cater to what they're trying to learn
that day and to make sure that they can
go watch it. I think it's one of our greatest
tools. And it's also nice
if you're like, hey, you didn't close the block.
I did close the block and you just pointed at the camera
and they give it one more second and it's going to
pop up and they're like, yeah, I didn't close the block.
It's just a great teaching tool.
Or we're wrong.
We're coaches too sometimes.
I think something happened and I watched the replay
and I'm like, oh, I was way off. Good job.
You did a nice job on that.
Then I have one more note where you explain something.
Yeah.
How was introducing?
Oh yeah, it was
completely at the end. I think you were explaining
maybe what's coming up.
I did.
I explained the blocking stuff just to introduce it then
so they have some time to think about it. That's all.
So I
Yeah, because this is a smaller practice.
It's nice to be able to explain things like that.
Just like, again, like another little
almost like a pocket drill like I was talking about earlier
with the overpasses.
We have this little moment.
I have three more extra minutes.
Let's just talk through this blocking scenario
and what we're going to work on later today
because this was the morning practice before the afternoon.
That's all.
