So right here, we're working on three hitters, front or commit,
and introducing it, meaning that if the middle is in the gap zone
or the 31 zone, then we're going to shift over.
Commit, meaning that we're going to just jump on it right away.
So that's the language that we use for that.
So we're working on those calls and then how it should look blocking-wise.
And then we're working on two-hitter, just either going to the outside
or going with the middle on the slide,
and where we want to move and how we want to move on that.
And then you'll see later that we take this and we put it in a six-person defense.
So we'll have a live attacking.
We'll do this with blocking, and then we'll move that into where we're actually doing it
and trying to transition out of it and understand the defense behind it.
Just installing all of our system stuff, basically.
Okay.
Still explanation.
I will skip one minute, and then...
Yeah.
And with Stanford kids, man, there's a lot of why.
There's a lot of questions, which I'm okay with.
They're asking a bunch to make sure they understand, which I like.
Other teams that coach, we tell them what to do.
They go try it.
Then they'd ask questions.
These guys ask a bunch of questions before, which I like a lot, actually.
They get into it.
And then once they understand, they understand it pretty well.
Actually, that's an interesting point.
How much of your time are you spending?
I don't want to say in.
Preparing practice, but in preparing, like,
preparing into knowing what kind of questions they're going to ask you.
Yeah.
I mean, I think now I'm used...
No, I'm ready for whatever.
I think I've done it enough that I kind of have an idea what the questions they're going to ask are.
But here, they're just asking a lot to make sure they understand.
Okay.
And then they will fast forward and be like,
all right, well, what about this situation?
And what about this situation?
And they're just trying to understand.
It's actually really cool.
I really like the communication.
It takes a little bit longer, but we're better at the end because it kind of solidifies.
So I think I've gotten so used to answering these questions all the time that I'm kind of prepared for whatever.
So right there, we're working on a commit, which we don't do very much.
But you saw McKenna's our middle and she's getting in front and she's making a commit on the middle,
which is something that we honestly, we haven't done a lot of.
We've had to do it a couple of times here this year, actually, already.
But it's not something that we like to be in a read a lot more.
Yeah.
But, you know, like when you face that middle, whatever, in the latest stage in season and have to do the commits,
it's better to have prepared it right now, I think.
Exactly.
And there's some teams that every time it's perfect, it's that quick, you know?
And so, like, I think understanding when we talk about things in perfect, perfect,
when it's like right on the setter's head, inside three feet, some teams will set quick a lot.
And then we want our, so we're going to need to have that in place.
And then we also, one of the things that we're not doing a great job of is that we start,
we're starting to get better at is when we're one-on-one as blockers, making big moves,
like outside of our shoulders, even trying to get them to do that.
But at this point, we're really just trying to get the middles to do what we want
and everyone to understand what the responsibilities are.
Because this is just putting this stuff in place.
Well, you see that she made a good move.
So it's as much about the commit as it is about being one-on-one as blockers on the outside, too.
And understanding that it's going to be a little bit different than when you have a middle closing to you, potentially.
Yeah.
