With prep for games, we like to have our main video session the day before the game.
How I will do it is that we will have usually video on the setter, which runs about six minutes, five, six minutes.
And then video on the attackers, so the individual attackers, which usually runs about seven minutes.
And that's our main meeting for the week.
So we'll introduce the scouting sheet that we've prepared.
And we'll talk about the general idea of what the team is trying to do, who their key guys are, what variation they might have in lineup, just to give the guys a good grounding.
Once you get around to playing teams enough, you usually have a pretty good idea.
And luckily, here we have access really easily to every game that happens in the league.
So there's a really good web portal that we can, the guys can watch everything on.
And then we try and talk about some specific situations, no more than five or six, and have it matched on the sheet with, okay, in these rotations, they like to do this.
So quite often with the setter back row, setter front row, you can divide things up.
And then if you need to go one more.
So P1, where things are a bit different, and P5, P6 are usually some similarities.
And you can talk about P6 is different to P5 like this, but this is the idea that they're working on.
And then similarly, the front row, or you break it down.
The setter is looking to do this with the opposite front, or this with the opposite back, and how they use the middles to create a big bind.
Then some things like if they're shifted in certain directions.
If they're off the net, here's how we want to be prepared for that.
So the set of video that I show is by rotation 98% of the time, unless there's something really different we need to show.
But it has to show the concept.
So it's not just distribution.
Here is a situation where he made this call to create this situation because of so if you're showing if the reception is coming from behind the setter.
He.
will play like this and it has to tie together the strands of information so they have a picture
in their head uh rather than just setters in three i'm looking for call close to the setter
and then ball fast to the position four because it's not visual enough it's not a concept it's
just information so to turn it into a concept that when stuff breaks down or goes off scripts
or they make a change in the lineup that you have a concept that you're working against rather than
fixed fixed points so that means also you need to keep it pretty short and simple
any information we can boil down my training is in journalism so you just never use extra
words when you don't have to which i clearly don't when i speak that's the good thing about
writing you can edit a lot better um but yeah if you can make the concept as simple as possible
the guidebook
guys can think faster in the game they can make decisions quicker because they're working around
a really clear simple concept rather than uh when this happens and this happens and this happens
the brain doesn't work fast enough to get through those progressions uh that's why nfl quarterbacks
struggle you know can you get you through your progressions fast enough it's the same with
middles can you get through your progressions if you break it down to a concept the brain can work
a lot faster so that's our main meeting
for the week uh with the guy or for the game with the guys uh if it runs longer than 20 25 minutes
that's that's a long one for us uh then on game day and morning uh we will have a meeting with
the receivers but they get the video the day before so they need to come to the meeting having
watched the video uh so that one normally if it runs over 15 minutes it's a exception um so
excuse me so it's
it's teeing back into the idea of the putting a premium on attention so i if i want to talk to
guys for an hour about something they're going to remember about five minutes of it so if they know
they're they only need 10 minutes of attention in a 15 minute meeting because i will tell some
bad jokes or something at the start uh then they can give me those 10 minutes and the information
will stick also everything backed up with something on paper so they have a connection
visually they have something they can refer back to i really like it
when guys write down notes because it helps with recall even if it's just drawing a line on
something or just the the physical mental connection for recall um but in that meeting
with receivers we can talk a lot about specifics what are you going to do here what are you going
to do here against this this server so that one is a bit more individual focused but between those
two ideas we can cover a lot of information pretty quickly
the job is on the staff to prepare it in a way that's simple enough and fast enough
and then there's the pressure on us as well if you've got really a day or so to prepare a whole
game so it helps us to keep things simple as well because we can't keep track of 15 things in the
game with two or three staff
