This is the main whiteboard, always on top left. I have a date of practice, time of practice, and some pre-practice activities. Our team either lifts weights before that or they don't. But for sure, as soon as they come in, we go right away and try to get some extra reps before we even get going with an official part of practice. Some of them are still getting taped. Some of them are still doing maybe a little bit of a treatment. But when you come up, you're not just standing around. Some of them are going to go warm up their arm a little bit, a quick arm. You can also call it pepper. Then on courts, because there are three courts in our gym available at all times, on court one and two, it says junk from the middle blocker. That means middle blockers are getting better and better at throwing balls down offensively. It's not all about just spiking the ball or hitting the ball now. They can throw the ball down. So, you know, that was from last October. And we were not really good at picking that up. So we're going to put in some extra work defending that. And then on court three, we're working on our entries plus transition footwork patterns. We want to be really clean and very fundamentally sound when it comes to our footwork patterns, both first ball and transition. With that, when you can create those. Then you can go and complain to the setter, you know, that setter set is not good. But until you don't, you're not consistent with your entry, with your footwork, your approach, your timing, then it's really hard to complain to the setter. Boxes in green with numbers one, two, one, two, or three. Those are, those are courts number, number, number of court. So we have court one, two, and three. So our athletes know exactly where to go. On top of that, you can see small abbreviations. JG, Jeremiah going to die. Keys, uh, MW, Mitch Worthington, Luca LS. Those are coaches assigned to certain core core court. So coaches are waiting. Ladies come up, Hey, let's go, let's go. Extra reps. Um, then you can see, yeah, you know, we have these concepts on the left side of the whiteboard and those concepts are there for good, um, for the semester or maybe for the whole year. Um, and the concepts are, you know, none of us is good enough yet. Always emphasis on. Um, and we're okay if we screw it up, if we make mistakes, uh, but the question is, what are we doing about it? You know, um, also, you know, we've noticed that, uh, generation of players that we're dealing with right now, um, feedback, it's a very sensitive topic, how they receive feedback. Uh, so it's really important how we give feedback as teachers and how they perceive that feedback as a learners as learners. So the bottom line is our grass is green and sky is blue, and we're not really good in serving for an example, or we're not really good offensive. And that's the, that's fact. So let's not get rattled about it. Let's not get touchy and sensitive about it. Let's go. We give you feedback. You make an adjustment. We talk about it. We try to figure it out, but let's move on. Feedback is not, not an attack. Feedback is in, in, in, in terms of learning, uh, consistent feedback is very important in, in players. Development, uh, consistent doesn't mean every single repetition. You give athlete a feedback feedback means that even going to practice athlete know what's her, um, what's her little rock or two little rocks that she's gonna work on. I know that we know the cues we're gonna use, the language we're gonna use with every athlete that resonates the best with her, that she understand what we're trying to achieve. And then what's really important. This process is we demonstrate, then they go try, then we give them a little bit of feedback as they go try again for, I don't know, three, four or five repetitions. And we give them a little bit of feedback again. And then we talk after practice, we watch video, we tag each other and discuss, Hey, can you see this? Can you do that? And that's that cycle of learning and getting better and trying to change habits, um, hugely for us first touch first contact is everything first contact in our gym. And I think. And, you know, in a game of volleyball is we gotta be a really good serving team, or we gotta be really good service team, and we gotta be able to dig some balls. Um, so, and ball controls are right. So first contact, uh, at least for the fall was one of our objectives when you are not at your best, when you're maybe not hitting great numbers, when you're not maybe playing, when you're on the bench, um, you know, how can you elevate your team? So we talk a lot about that. It's not about you as much as we love you and we want the best and the most success for you. We have, I don't know, 16, 17, 18 players on the roster. Uh, so not all of you are gonna play, you know, at all times. So how can you elevate in other areas on the court or off the court? Uh, how can you, how can you, yeah, help your teammates? And one thing we talk a lot about, you know, this generation, you know, I have daughter of that age and I have son that it's a little bit younger. And I've been around these women now for a pretty long time. They wanna be perfect and it's like, it's impossible to be perfect guys. Let's just, there's gonna be great matches and there's gonna be amazing practice, but it's chasing that it's waste of energy. You start spinning and that's where you guys get overwhelmed and things go south. So, and that's something that Kartra is really good at. I would say drilling into our national team leading, you know, four years leading to Tokyo and before that, like just playing. Just be good over time. Let's not be great, but let's not suck a lot, but let's just be good over time. And there's gonna be ebbs and flows in our performance and learning because that's what it is. It's not linear. It's gonna be up and down. Uh, but just be good over time. Just by being good over time, we're gonna win a lot of points. We're gonna win a lot of sets. We're gonna win a lot of matches. Okay. So, but that's how you gotta train that way and you gotta be resilient. You gotta have grit and you, you just have to have this habits in place where you can be good over time. And that's why the best teams in the world are. Yeah. The best teams in the world. All right. Because they're good over time. They're not like good first three matches and they suck for the rest of the season. No, they're good. Most of the time they're pretty good. So, so yeah, those are a few concepts and then we have this little thing going on. What's word of the day. So we learn a little bit on the way and, um, uh, there's like a, an app where you click and it gives you new word of the day. And then I ask him, Hey, what, what's omnipotent, what that word means. And they're like, sometimes they know, sometimes they know, and we just learn in three seconds. We just learned a new word. So it's just a little activity we do, um, that we did last semester. Uh, and then on the top right announcements, there's always something, is that right? Just to make sure that we know what's next, what's happening tomorrow, celebrating, um, 