So we code every practice so that the girls can come in and watch on volumetrics, all the actions. And we have statistics and we just know a little bit more about them. So obviously we don't have girls that play all the time, but we need to know if they putts well on their left or their right or where they struggle and those kinds of situations. So we code every six on six practice. And so when we are going to use the big court, then I don't like put the video up on the short ones. Usually we are just coding typically the, the, the six on six main part. So all the stuff before is not there because it's on them. We use the three courts. Of course. And here we can see the big screen at the top left. You have a second. Yeah, we got two of those. So we, I just use like a, an app called BAM video delay. I think it's like $5 in the app store and then we connect it to Apple TVs, which to connect to our, our screens. And so I love the use of the replay. I think it's really, really important for the girls to get that instant feedback. It's, it's way more valuable than anything I can say because they can see exactly what we've, what we've been asking. And, you know, it just helps them with their own like kind of self-awareness and to see really what's happened in those situations. And once we teach them to understand a little bit more what they're looking for, it becomes a really valuable resource. If they don't know what they're looking for, then it's not that helpful, but that's on us to, to know that. All right. Okay. So here, let me just take a look at my exercise first. I think it's high ball, high ball. Yeah. Okay. It's really can. So I see what we're doing exactly with coaches. All right. Okay. So we're working on high ball, like attacking. Honestly, let me rephrase that. We're working on high ball block defense, basically. Of course then there's an element of high ball attacking as well, but we'll see here specifically our coach is down the end and he's throwing the ball in. Usually if we're working on high ball attacking, I am not throwing a ball in. I'm going off, off of a live ball. So if we're working on attacking specifically, then we need to be working on setting because we can't attack if we don't set well. So we usually roll a ball into a coach and we go off a platform for some reason, when we throw the ball and when we platform the ball, there is a huge difference in our setting ability. Still it's getting better and better because we do it a lot. But in this case, I wanted to really, really nail our high ball block defense. So we are throwing the ball in because we are better setters, especially our non setters are better setters. When we throw the ball in again goes against that game life philosophy, but this particular exercise is very important that we are able to attack the ball so that we are able to get a good block defense make. And that's what we're working on here. So we're throwing the ball in and we're just doing two on each side, two to the high ball and four, two to the high ball in the red. We play it out. I try to play it out most of the time unless we are trying to manage our load. If we're managing our load, we might stop after the first dig. But again, our second touch is so important. Sometimes there needs to be emergency second touches. And if we are practicing just getting that first dig and then stopping, then we're not practicing landing from a block, searching for the ball and things that are really, really important to our game and that I believe give us an edge over other teams because we really, really focus on quite a lot. So we kind of always play it out unless we're managing our load. And even then we will still get a second touch in that. We just won't attack it. So yeah, pretty much we're working on blocking the approach of the player here and then setting up our block defense around it. And we're as coaches, we're just checking, if we're in our position as a base, like really we have a base like high ball defense on either side and we need to be nailing that if we are with our surfaces up ready to go. And then another coach is checking our block like really important. We're working with our middles quite a lot to obviously to close to the outside, but to also be able to then reach in and take a little bit more angle to the, you know, sharp cross angle and one of our middle is like struggles with that quite a lot. She still doesn't get close enough and still reaches in closing the seam pretty well, but like then leaves a really big sharp cross space. So a big focus in this training was, was for her to be able to, you know, if she is blocking to her right and she's blocking the high ball in four to really close with her right hand and kind of drop that left hand in, or sometimes to take, it really depends on the player. I want my middles, I'm going on a tangent here, but I want my middles to be able to do a lot of different things. We might play against a player and we played against one yesterday who hits sharp cross or line. She never hits the same. So we're not going to block the same. We're going to block the, we're going to have our outside block straight line. And then our middle needs to, especially in those high ball situations, get there and really take both hands and take her cross. And if she baits the same, she baits a theme, but she doesn't. So then we take away her two extremes that she attacks and our middles need to be able to do both. If someone doesn't lock sharp cross, then we know that I'm sorry. If someone doesn't attack sharp cross, then we know that, and we don't need to pay as much attention to dropping in and we need to really make sure that same is absolutely close. So, um, this exercise is just really a block defense exercise. There we are a tip falling down, um, that we just practice high ball. Block defense really is a focus here. We're not scoring, um, because again, we want, you know, us to really be able to work on things. And of course the attacking side is still working. So, um, our keys to them are just really working on that horizontal and vertical range. Again, even though the big focus is on the block and the defense, which is why I have my, like my first assistant is down. I'm the end there. Um, you know, talking to the players about their defense and what positioning go to the next one. Sure. It can be that I'm, you know, it is, this is the, this one. No, not yet. I think this is the same. I saw it. So we, we go, oh, wait, no, now we're working in system. So now we've changed the system. Yeah. First of all, is more in system again. And this is like, like I said, it's not something that if you come to my practices, you see a lot that we are throwing a ball in like this to a setter. It just, it's oh, I make you in the run. Um, I saw that. I'm going to ask about that. Let's, let's, let's, let's, let's go again. Wait, because they're running quite a bit. I was, I was not surprised about it, but I was like, okay, what are we doing here? Let's find the starting point with the system ball. We just take the one that we just had. Yeah, that's fine. Yeah. Yep. Yeah. It's difficult to find. Not always. It doesn't really matter. Anyway, it's like, it's all the same. I think this is the start. Yeah. So we're working on in system blocking. So in this case, we've sort of upgraded, you know, we went high ball, high ball, high ball, high ball. And now we're going, um, go, go red, red. So our position for an apposition to in system ball, um, again, you won't find me or us really throwing a lot of balls to the setters that often. Um, in fact, I don't know if we haven't done it again since then, but the main focus is that we are on or around the four meter, um, line running and medium in system go, um, so that we can practice really specifically blocking that without really even reading the setter. So we know the ball's going there. Um, we know the ball's going to that situation. Our big focus then is just our lineup on the, on the attacker and our press. So, um, I believe in like breaking things down when we need to, like as much live possible is really important, but sometimes you need to really focus on a couple of things. So here we're focusing on our lineup and our press, you know, in system situations, we're taking out the read so that then we know where that's going. We're taking out the read of the setup, but we're not taking out the read of the attacker obviously. Um, so getting our lineup correct really on the attacker's approach that we're watching her, her body. We're watching the ball, which is really important in system. Um, I think as a middle blocker, you know, it like the ball tells you a lot of where, where things are going as well, or how long the ball is and things like that. So if the ball is going to be shot, it doesn't matter where the attacker wants it. If the ball is going to be shot, it doesn't matter where the attacker wants to go. The ball, they're going to have to hit it inside, you know, and we need to be paying attention to that and getting our lineup correct. Um, and our press. So two years ago I did like a big study on, um, a block and it basically, I did a bunch of custom codes on, um, you know, if the block is open, if there is one block, if the middle blocker is reaching into close, if the middle blocker is straight over with a seam, um, if the middle blocker is reaching like in and leaving a seam, um, if the outside, the blocker is reaching out, the outside blocker is straight. And if we are pressed with our hands over the net on the time of the contact, and then I did like a bunch of calculations from that, or like a bunch of different, like, you know, combinations. So single block, all that kind of stuff, by far the most important thing for us in that season was that we were pressed. So it didn't matter if the middle reached or they went straight or they left a seam or, or our outside even reached out. Like it didn't, it just didn't matter. As much as us being pressed over the net. Um, so of course, you know, we're so ingrained in the things that we, we think should be correct that like, don't reach out on the block. They'll expose you and stuff like that, that I, I have to do study to check. Am I saying stuff that even is real, or am I saying it just because I know it from my past and from coaches that have told me it before. So, um, it really forced me to go, okay, like, you know, I'm going to do this. I'm going to do this. I'm going to do this. of course it did show that being straight over as an outside was better than reaching out as an outside, but only by like a few percent. Um, what was more important was that we were pressed, press, press, press, press, press, press, press. So most of our feedback gets on, obviously we need to be lined up in the right position, um, and getting pressed in time. Cause if we're not pressed in time, we're not going to get like, we're not going to slow the attacker down. The measure that I use was opposition hitter efficiency. I'm sure there are better measures or different ways you can do that, but I use opposition hitter efficiency and the opposition hitter efficiency when we had a, a, a press block was like really low. So here, um, a huge focus is on taking out a few of our like variables. We're taking out, um, the set of read and then we're just getting like pressed in these situations. Um, and that's, that's what we're working on here. Wait, stop. I'm going to move to. I'm good for a run. I don't like to punish the players that much. I, I can just, we can just like not talk about this. Like I can just edit it out. Like nobody knows. Like you want to talk about it or not? The thing is like, if you want, I don't really care. Like it's just, it's the same thing like pepper. Like we talk about punishment doesn't really work for players, but it's not really like punishment. It's like an agreement at the start of the season. We're like, listen, you guys can go for the ball. You know, you can, we have a system that was a, that was a free ball. That system in that particular case should be the middle block of stepping back and taking that ball. We know the system. Um, and that's where, if that happens a little bit more, like, it's just kind of like, okay, we're going to start running. If that happens. And the girls were like, yup, because they also don't want to be like this. And it's just kind of agreement. We met at the start of the season. Nobody's really mad about it. I don't think it really feels like a punishment. Um, I don't know if there's a better way to do it. Um, but I certainly, it's just kind of an effort or a focus thing. We, we just have a little dog together. Um, and we go on. I've got to use it with my, with my son also look, it's not a punishment. This is an agreement. It's an agreement that we met at one side of the room for my son. But everyone's kind of just like on board with it, you know, like we can do this. It doesn't, we don't even, we might've run a lot in this practice here. We have, um, we have a lot of girls, so we have, we have a second team as well. And every week I have a practice where I bring a couple of girls from the second team in so that we have developing them for the future. I think it's really important for us. Like we would like to have local Swiss players if we can. Um, and so of course, then the, the quality of practice, 