So actually my assistant runs the morning practice. I'm here and I'm coaching obviously, but we split it up that she is like plans and runs the morning practice. We obviously have a big communication about what we're doing, but it's just, you know, she's a really good coach as well. And I think it helps to have another voice and then for me to be able to step back from planning and just coach in the practice as well, which is also pretty important. So when you see a different handwriting on the whiteboard or her talking a lot more in these practices, it's because she's running it. So yeah, here we're just doing some individual reception. I believe, sorry, just let me check where I'm looking. Yeah, we're doing two normal. So where we just stay in the two of us, we have a Libro and an opposite on the camera side here. She's an opposite, but we're working with outsides as well. So we have a Libro and an outside here passing. We do two where it's normal, where they stay and they receive in their zone. And then we're doing one with a leave, which means like as, we serve our position six is going to go and take that space. So we're practicing some reception tactics that we may or may not use in a game. We typically start in normal in reception, but we have these leaves or pinches available. And in this case, we're practicing a leave. So I'm up on the box there serving down the line and I have a middle blocker serving cross court. And yeah, we don't want to take reps away from players, but we really, really need to practice these situations. Cause otherwise we're going to do it in a game and we're going to shank it. And it's a really special situation because we are like being super aggressive, knowing that they're going after our outside hitter. We're going to have her leave and we're going to take that zone. And you know, it honestly works 95% of the time, 5% of the time someone knows the tactic and they'll serve back into zone six and we're in trouble. But we are kind of prepared for that as well. So that's what we're practicing here. Two normal and then one leave. Yeah, very clear. Let's go to the next one. I think we do a pinch in the next one where we're just pinching it in. Yeah. Okay. So here again, we're doing two normal where we just pass in our zone and then we're pinching our position six to the left. So we call it a pinch, which means that yeah, she's basically going to take more space and then we leave our position, our position five just to take really what's coming on her body. So this is different to the leave in the fact that we are not, she will pass a smaller zone, but we're taking a bigger zone with, you know, in what we hope is our better passer in this particular case. And so again, we want to practice that. So if we go into a game, we can just scream out pinch and we know that we make that move. We will leave in this particular case, it'll be a liberal in position one and she'll take like a lot more space down there in position one. And who's taking the decision to like, to go to the pinch? It's like, there's a lot of responsibility on the liberal or you're coaching it or? Yeah. So yeah, a bit of both. So basically free every game. This particular video is done by my assistant. She does a reception video with the receivers and then they talk about maybe a base strategy we have on each player. So maybe we start normal, maybe we start in a pinch because we absolutely know that they're going to target the front row outside hitter in these certain rotations. We generally have our matchups correct. So we talk about the tactic before and we talk about quick changes that we make and how quickly we will do it. So we'll say, hey, we'll start in our base, but if she's doing this, we can, we can move into a pinch or a leave or something else. You know, we put someone, we just path to two passes and we put someone short. And so, or it's a liberal. She can make the call. I can make the call and my assistant can make the call. It really kind of just really depends, but we are all there ready to do it. And they have pre-talked about it in this video. So it's not really a surprise that we're ready to make that change after one or two errors or if we're not fighting out or something like this. Yeah, very clear. The next one. Okay. Okay. Okay. I think we also have on the, on the whiteboard, we have hold as a big key. Like we just, in practice, we really want to exaggerate holding the, um, the platform after just to get a little bit of feedback on that platform. It's not something that we really focus on every day, but it's written there on the whiteboard in this particular case, which is, um, get a little bit of self feedback. All right. So here we are working on rotation one when we do a double sub. Um, so today it's a particular day is a really, really individual practice. We only bought six people in, um, we had some other girls, they went to kind of do a recovery lift and then they came in later. But, um, when we double sub, we end up in a rotation one where we would like to do like a switch out at the top. So we put three players at the front and then they're flipping out and we pass completely to two people. So this is like specifically working on this situation. If we have done a double sub and we're in rotation one, we're not going to spend a lot of time on it. We haven't done this ever again, actually, because honestly we only need to practice it just so that they understand what happens. Um, but we, we want to make sure early on in the season, and this is quite early on in the season, all our situations that we might be in are just kind of, you know, touched on and understood. So here we're purely receiving the two people, but no one else that can come in because we have our outside and our opposite up at the net switching out in a double sub rotation one where we're, we're working in that situation. So, and on the other side, you, um, I just, it's liberals can be ignored a lot. So we, we always try to have them, um, having something, something extra, there. So here she is digging and she's setting, um, the second ball. So the server comes in, um, hopefully not always digs that first ball and then, and then we get the second touch set here. We're practicing from five and six in case we move around a little bit as well. I said, second touch is so, so important for us. So we try to integrate it into almost every, every morning practice, some, some form of second touch. So you see, we're making a ton of service errors here. Um, like lots and lots and lots. Uh, typically I, yeah, I've coached a lot of teams. They get very frustrated in the morning practices when they don't get a bunch of reps because there are a lot of serve errors. We're a high serve error team. Um, if we are worried about the, the past is not getting enough reps, we'll just put a coach there to serve on, um, on an era rather than talking about, um, having to serve it in because we really want to practice game serves. We really want to get them like to be able to learn how to miss and then how to stay aggressive anyway, um, rather than changing their serve to an easier serve, which honestly, once you get into high level volleyball, you serve it easy serve, it's toast, you're going to lose a point. So, um, we, if, if we would need, if I would be worried that like there are too many misses, I probably won't be speaking to the servers unless they are just on characteristically missing under the net every time. And I know that that's something that's just a focus error. I'll talk about it. Otherwise I'll just throw a coach down there and say, Hey, put in a ball when it's an era, just so the receiver can get the rep. Otherwise we need to keep, keep pushing on the surf a little bit. So that's pretty much how I, how I manage those situations. After I just saw that we missed about 10 serves in a row there. I'm already standing there ready to put a ball in on there because I noticed that we were airing a lot, but I don't want them to stop the aggression on the serve. And I think that's really, really important that to make that distinction as a coach, like what is your philosophy? And then you need to stand by it in training because all of a sudden, if you freak out in training saying, Hey, we're missing all the serves, but you know, you're asking them to serve aggressive. Every time they go back in a game, you're not connecting with what you're asking and you need to find a better way to do it like yourself, rather than just to put it on the players. At least that's what I tell myself. No, no. Uh, agreeing 100% with that. Yeah. The lack of consistency is kills. Yeah. That's it's yeah. One of the big things I always have to come back on myself, like, am I being consistent to what I've actually asked them? Because when I get fired, when I get emotional, when I get stressed, like it's so easy for me to be like, well, Oh, we need to do this. This and this. And I'm like, that does not absolutely go with, you know what I'm asking the philosophy of the game. And I need to hold myself really accountable to that, which is why I have everything written down everywhere so that everybody knows what we're trying to do. So if I'm, if I'm off, I've even had players in the past, you know, that'll tell me, Hey, like, this is not exactly what we're looking at. Okay. So now we have moved on to just another kind of station here. We're working with three passes, but doing the same thing. So we've just kind of upgraded it. So now we have three passes where we're going to do, or three receivers, sorry, hence what, what language people are listening to me. We have three receivers and we're doing two normal, and then we're doing a pinch. So we practice the pinch situation where our position one, whether that be the liberal or whether that be, that's beautiful scene management, whether that be a liberal or whether that be the outside hitter, working on taking more space and working in the pinch. So again, two normal, and then one in the pinch situation. And we still have our opposite or our, our servers over there serving and then getting a dig and a set because you know, whether we, whether we agree that like box reps are good or not it's a morning practice. I don't want my players jumping. So we're going to get some reps off the box and, and be able to practice our second touch as well there, which is really important and managing our opposites load. So she's in position one, it's our opposite and she, you know, she doesn't pass for us. So I'm wanting practice for her. If, if she's doing an hour of serving, that starts to become a load that is just like insane. So we make sure that we have her not serving in a lot of the drills and working on our defense, which, you know, she needs and her second touch or her free ball passing, like, or, you know, decision-making on free ball on the net or not. So, yeah. Oh, it's interesting that you say, like we talked about pepper and also the spiking from the box. In my opinion, it's more of a coaching thing. No player has an issue with doing pepper. No player has an issue with doing a defensive move after a serve. So it's, it's just like, coaches trying to be dangerous for me to say smarter than they are. It's not about being smarter than they are, but just finding stuff is it's not game. Like, so we should not do it. No. That's the thing. It's like my, I'm really like, obviously I'm trying to be a thing. Like it's possible. I really want us to, you know, be able to have the read and do that kind of thing as much as possible. But the fact is we practice twice a day, but, and if we're doing game, like things every single day, that means there is a jump somewhere. And I need this to be, you know, that we do maximum 40 jumps on the serve because that's already quite a lot, you know? So we, we, we keep track of all that kind of stuff and, and we need to be, we need to be smart and we need to be careful with what we're doing. So, um, some things come off the box. It is what it is. Like it's maybe not as good as a live rep, but it's better than no rep. So exactly. I think there's one more here. The liberals are doing some work. Yes. This is probably not even, it's probably just extra time. Yeah. So at the end, we do some studying, I think. Yep. So basically we usually, you know, we especially in the mornings leave, like we plan like 50 minutes and then we leave 10 minutes where a lot of girls can say, Hey, like we were like, okay, optional, what do we want? And maybe we have some stuff on the board that people have already asked us in, we have individual meetings each week with the players and they say, I need to practice that, that, that we'll put it on the board to remind us of, or they just, at the end of practice, they ask, can I practice a certain situation? And the more we do that, the smarter they get. And they start to really like know what they need to practice. And they even have the keys that they they're working on. And so it needs, it needs individual meetings that we do weekly. They, most of them use it to come in and talk about some things. And we, we talk them through what that actually means. Like I, you know, I want to work on my setting. Okay. In what situations are you feeling like, and what, what keys are you thinking about? So here she's working like a bro really wanted to start isolate working on like a pivot set with her left foot. She is, you know, she's a new liberal. She has a really deep set. So the pivot kind of helps her to get a bit more strength in that situation. So we, we've okay, we're going to do 20 reps of this pivot set. And that's not even the set that we always wanted to do, but she knows that she's struggling with that. And so she asked for that in that situation. 