Should I maybe talk about why I use the whiteboard or not? I don't know if everybody does that. Nobody, not one coach in my whole entire career used the whiteboard. Yeah, let's press play and then they can see you explain, right? I think we're already warming up because I had it in my notes every minute that you go to the whiteboard because it's like three, four times at practice. But then I just sketched it out. Okay, good. Right, so this is actually our game day dig tenor. So I'm guessing this was before a game day. And if we don't have a practice on the game day, it can be various reasons. Maybe the game's early or it's away and we've decided it's not a good time to have. This is our game day dig tenor. So usually it's the morning of the games. We come in and we play short court till eight points. And then once it gets to eight points, we go deep court one-on-one, one touch, get out. It's so competitive. Actually, what is on the whiteboard, which I didn't maybe explain before, is we count each day the minigames. We do old versus young almost every day, some kind of little minigame. And we count the points. At the end of the season, we give a gift to the winning team. It's been the old every single year, but the young is in front this year. So it just adds a little extra competitiveness and they get pretty excited to win a point on the whiteboard. So the winner of this will get a point on their whiteboard and maybe it's, I don't know, we have three points. A hundred points up there at the end of the season. And it's tallied on the whiteboard all the time as well. It's something so simple, but I like the detail that you put into it. Keeping the tally, have the gift thing. Even if it's an unimportant gift, it doesn't matter. Well, actually, yeah. Last year, we gave them a lottery ticket and a small bottle of champagne. It's just something stupid. You know, they could scratch the lottery ticket and they win two francs or no francs. And then they get a small bottle of champagne to celebrate. And it's just something fun for the whole season. It keeps the daily grind. It keeps the grind enjoyable. Again, it's about if you do something, you better do it as good as possible. And then you're like, you squeeze everything out of it from team country point of view, et cetera. That's the word I want to use. I actually really like coaching at this level. I don't, at the moment, have any big, I don't feel the need to go up into the next level, even though as arrogant as it sounds, I know that I can. I know that I'm a good enough coach to be moving up. I like to coach at this level. I have to. I have to get the most out of all the players that I have. I have to teach them. I really enjoy that component of working with the players and helping them, I don't know, become better players, but also better humans. We have a bunch of books that they have to read and we chat about. We have these individual meetings each week. And at this kind of level, which is really starting to be a really good and interesting level, but if you've not the highest level, there is a lot of interesting work that we need to do with individual players, with the group, with the culture. And I, at this club, I have a lot of freedom to work in the way that I want to work here. And it's really important for me because I know that I can be as successful as I need to be when I'm like able to implement the things I need to implement. And that's not the case everywhere. So I like working at this level. Everyone asks me why I don't move and that's why at the moment. Yeah, but the important thing there, and it's something that you want to say, but you're not saying it also at the higher level, people should be doing stuff like that. They're not doing it. Yeah, I'm far better than most of the people at the higher level. You know what I mean? My expectation would be like, yeah, well, this, I don't want to rank stuff, but higher level than you're now at is top two, three in France. Let's put it, so that's higher level. Yeah, yeah, for sure. If you're going to coach a top two, three team in France, I hope you're going to do the same thing as you're doing here. Otherwise you're also, otherwise you shouldn't be doing what you're doing right now. No, of course. But there are other things when my main point is when you come into the higher level, you have people choosing players for you. You have people who tell you the way you should be coaching. And it's just like, honestly, they're not coaches, so they're probably not right. And so I, it's not that I don't want to deal with that stuff. I like what I'm doing here in this situation and the freedom that the club gives me to, to actually grow the players in the club. And I mean, it's, it's worked. It doesn't always work like it's worked. We came from fifth when I came here to be really like quite dominant in the last four years. I am. I understand. That's not. That's not always the result of good work has been this time. You're going to go to the whiteboard so we can talk about it. Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, good. Yeah. Well, the player there is putting the point up for the old team, the old team on that day. So she's putting a little, little stripe up. It is currently old is an old is winning by one point right now. Like it looks like 27 to 26 points. So it's a very close race this year so far. We're already at Christmas. So yeah. Um, yeah, I put everything on the whiteboard. I put like little mini focuses for the week or some maybe statistics and things we need to improve and, and I put all of practice up there. Um, I like structure. Um, but I, I think this comes a lot from as a player, um, I don't coach the way that like I played, I'm a completely different personality to that, but, um, I, I think that when I was playing, I was taking in a lot of information that I didn't. Really realize about stuff that was important to me and that wasn't. And of course, things that were important to me as a player are not going to be always important to all players, but logically a lot of things are quite similar. So, um, respecting like the time of the practice is really, really important to me. Um, I think that in professional volleyball, we get into a mindset, um, in some clubs and coaches that, you know, we kind of are in the players, um, and we don't, so they work for us. And they have work times as well. And, um, we have a time of practice and I like to put on the board what we're doing. Um, so that they know they can walk in, they can check the board and they're like, okay, oh, we're focusing on this today. I can, I can increase their performance because they walk in and say, Hey, I'm, I'm focusing on block today. Okay. Like I need to think about that. The thought there's key points as they're warming up. They are already thinking about that. They know that they're feeling maybe a little bit tired, for example, this day, but they know, okay, I have this, this, and this to do. I push this much. And then I'm going to, I'm going to be able to stop and I'm going to rest and whatever I'm going to go home. And as opposed to the mentality of like, I don't really know how long practice is going to go. I'm going to take some points off and I'm going to rest myself and make sure I don't hurt my shoulder and things like that. I want things to be fully transparent. This is what we're going to do. Um, this is the structure we're going to have. These are the keys that you need to focus on. And I, it's really first and foremost, it's about respecting the player's time. Um, and second, it's about like keeping a structure for myself. That I am able to change if I need. So we, I think we've already seen earlier that I changed the scoring system when I don't think it's working very well, or if the rotations don't work that well, or if it's going much longer than I thought I will cut some rotations out. I'll just wipe it off the whiteboard. I'll change a drill if I want. Um, but ultimately it's not, it doesn't happen that much because I plan well. So the plan usually works quite well. I've, I've been doing this for almost 10 years now, so I know how long things take as a general rule and, and, and that kind of stuff. And, and I'm able to do that. But I'm not really getting the practice to be exactly the time that I want. Um, which I just think is really important for respecting the, the players time and, and efforts and, and things like that. So. I use a whiteboard. In general, like how far out do players know their weekly schedule or maybe monthly? I don't know. That's a very good question. I, we have like the, the schedule done for the whole year. So I have, I use a Google calendar. Um, and again, it's about respecting the player's time. So we use Google calendar. We fill it in for the whole year. um and we endeavor to only take things off rather than put things on so i i we will go through probably a month in advance so we tell the players this is scheduled for the whole year um you can be almost you can be sure that for the next month it's fixed pretty much like and then if you have questions about like if they want to take a trip and they see that it's like some days off or something if you have questions about a bit further away then just like check in with us before you book anything because we never know if we have a gym change or something stupid but we don't we don't make a lot of changes um again it's just it's about energy management it's about them understanding when they can go to the supermarket or planning their coffee with a friend like silly things that if you are just sitting in your house waiting for the schedule the next day you you start to feel owned and this is not a really nice feeling so i've had this before as a player and i want them to know what the schedule is like as much in advance as i as i can and i just warn them like hey maybe there's going to be changes in this week or something but otherwise we have to make a change a google calendar that's that's set for pretty much the year because i used to have situations where on sunday i would get the next week's schedule on paper and i just i can't do anything then i i don't i am a professional volleyball player but that's not everything that i am and so it was really frustrating to me as a player that that was the way that the mentality was um about me as a human and i don't want any humans that are working for me to feel that way so give them the best environment possible but that doesn't mean pandering to them or like catering to every need it means like giving them the appropriate structure and respect like to thrive and and that's just like a really big distinction that i know helps that i have played i don't think it helps me that much i don't think that playing at a high or medium level like me really even helps that much to coach but it does in terms of having the empathy of like what it means to be a professional player and like the environments that we are put in because volleyball is still one of the most unprofessional professional sports that exists yes so um we do like a lot of servant passing reception like we just do a lot it's it's important our serve for us is one of the biggest like points of that game where we i like to distinguish us from other teams um and so we do a lot of this this is just um called set a better so it's it's got a three big point game basically um the whole reception is working as a group and the whole third is working as a group um so you got to get three good receptions in a row to get a big point or you got to get three good serves in a row to get a big point um however i'm adding on top of this um set a better so if it's a good pass a good reception and the setter gets it in um then confirmed um you get your you get your like reception point um if they miss then it becomes a serve point uh and if they get a ball in that is not a good pass then you upgrade it to a good point so it's just i don't do it too much because honestly setting into target is like one thing that again is not always the the measure but it's kind of fun um it puts a little bit of pressure on the setter to see if they keep their technique and they put work in that in in situations um and it's a great reception game the three big point game because it's very competitive there's a lot of pressure in that um and you got to get three in a row to get to get a big point and once you get to three big points you are the winner and that's it that's the game we play and we serve and we run to the other side and very often sorry yeah we serve and then you run to the other side so that we're serving from both sides and very often i say that they have to serve from one and one and then from five and five so that again we're burying our position um i gotta give that instruction or they forget because players can't remember everything all right so um i just don't let me to my notes like we're working on transition yeah it's it's i think this is one is like two balls to the middle two balls to the to the opposite two balls to the outside like more yeah i've got two i've just got two courts on here so i'm trying to figure out which one this one is but yeah okay we're working on a transition attack mostly right so we have a post just throwing it over um to one of the other middles that's waiting so that we have other bros doing something a little bit more useful on the other side um and playing defense over there so we're working on our transition footwork our transition attack our speed in our transition and just making sure that when we do attacking reps that they are like they have something specific in them so we're not just doing that when it's possible try to put a i try to put a block up um but again if we're saving jumps i'll put a block on um a box and just sort of have hands there um and this day we had a like a bit of a focus in the middle on on transition attacking for the middles because we needed to get more transition balls to our middle so then we practice in an easy situation transition to the middle uh before we upgrade it into something a little bit more live so coach throws it over we transition into different situations we give instructions to the the receiver to pass it sometimes perfect pass it off the net to pass it left and on a shift like left or right and and things like that so we can practice all kinds of all kinds of situations we have a specific footwork that we want hitters to do that we we know helps them to be faster but it's the same concept as i've said before like there are ideal ways to do things and ways that i'll teach but we have people that come in that like say backpedal really well and then go so like do i really need to teach them to turn and run like i probably don't um but if someone is not effective or has a little bit footwork that is hindering their ability to get on the right step because in this case we want to be you know on the fourth step pretty much in in a fast middle ball if something is hindering them being able to do that effectively then we're going to um we're going to be able to change it we're going to be working on it so not to put a spotlight on a on a digital player but you have somebody here that should be like a great example of a somebody that backpedals how you like if you would have the possibility to yeah i like our opposite probably she she's come in and and she's not as um she's probably not as technical as what i would normally train um but she's quite quick so it's very rare that i have found that she's not on the right step for example to be um like she she's pretty much always available correctly in transition and she does backpedal most of the time so we'll have her do some turn and run reps just to because there are some things happen like that um but ultimately the focus for her is to be coming off her second step to attack and how she gets there like it's okay i'm not mistaking i think it's gonna be yeah so again just being pretty specific about what we're doing so we're working on you know transitioning from our left move back being prepared to run that like gap play um because it's something that's really important we we run a quite a fast offense so if we can get a good gap the overload situations we create on the left side are really really dangerous um and our opposite is quite dominant so the minute that we create those isolate situations for her we're in a good spot so that gap in trans is important for us and we are still really working on it becoming a big a big thing for us i think that's probably it for that drill yeah um yeah kind of move to six against six yes so we're doing two six on six drills in this day like i i i do one or two but obviously we were working a lot on on transition attack before and a big you know we have really strong pin attackers so a lot of teams like immediately dedicate to our pins and if we can get a little bit more middle in transition um i mean they're they're free they're open and we just need to get our setters a little bit more confident to do it so this drill is like literally middle blocker trans i call it five or nothing so if the ball hits the floor and nobody touches it not on the block not on the hand we go back to zero so it's a little bit of extra intensity the focus is on the middle is attacking but then everyone else isn't just like hanging around doing nothing um they're gonna have to get some touches and some digs so you get the fine points you win but the ball touches the floor nobody nobody touches it that can be like blocked down or anything um we go back to zero um the first ball has to go to the middle in trans so we're making it relatively easy so we're putting a ball over that's coached like they throw it up and they set it over we're supposed to do a full block move i have to remind them every time to do it but they do a full block move and we must set the middle on this ball any ball after that um that is like an organic transition is two points because obviously it's a little bit harder to make an organic transition so we're forcing a trans in an easy situation so that we must set the middle here if we get a dig um and we set the middle in trans like this the boom okay they get two points for for for getting this in an organic transition situation they're mini games to five and then we just rotate through positions like we have three middles so one's waiting off when it's quite tense for the middles this drill but obviously it's really good and we also have it to be specific on the first ball that it's a one-on-one block so that like we know that this is a situation that mostly our middles face are a one-on-one block situation and and we also want them we wanted to practice our defense around it so um we're going one-on-one block on the first ball after that everything's organic and we help in our zone and everything that that works for our system so i cannot do this too oops you forgot one-on-one block i cannot do this too i'll be honest with you i can do this to get three points but i can't do this to get three points to do that because it's like quite intense for the middles but like on the the weeks that i that they're they don't have too big a load then i really like to do something like this it's quite quick we play four little games i believe i have to double check exactly we played four games and it's quite quick there are five points as long as you don't have too many go back to zeros um then it's done pretty quickly but a bunch of good trans reps no great and also big thanks for mentioning that you do it's it's rather short and it's only like four games or whatever there's like a lot of oh yeah this will be kill this will kill people when you if you don't do things at game speed if you're not working at game speed it's like double the intensity of a game and like this is something that we need to remember and when you track the loads and the jumps you start to see this but not every coach does that or not every coach has resources so if you do not if you do something at double than game speed it's double the intensity and people die your next one and that's i think that's the final big six against six and you're gonna end with that yeah we do we do it for quite a long time yeah wait till we get there i think okay i'm gonna try to get the starting starting point okay so this was a it was a new like xs or new game that we did um i like i said i don't i have like a i have a spreadsheet with all sixes that i do but i add to it most days because most days i'm thinking hey what are we struggling at um and how do i like manifest or create a drill that will work on that so this one in this case i i think that we we needed to be under pressure and outside out so it was a big focus on like pressure side out so you get three balls or three you get three serves coming at you um and if you sided out two out of three you could rotate to the next position but if and it's a race so we this team team a um serves three balls team b serves three balls team a serves three balls team b serves three balls so it's a race to get through all the rotations and we're just rotating in truth, which means like the negative to this is that you can be stuck sometimes in the same rotation. So somebody it's front row quite a lot and you have to keep that into account. Um, when you go to the next game, like who was front row a little bit more, I don't usually do a lot of things like this because then maybe, you know, my outside hit a one number nine could be front row for 20 minutes, but then I just remember that going to the next game, I put her back row and start her back and things like that. But it's called pressure side out. But, um, if you get two out of three, you rotate. Um, and if you get three out of three, you send the other team back one rotation. So it really, really like gave a chance to really have an incentive to get that three out of three, but two out of three is already good because that's like 60 plus percent. I'm really bad at math, but 66%, I think 66.6%. Um, and that would be a side out rate. That would be really good for us. Low sixties is usually the Swiss league. So above that is fine. And I would, I would adjust that to be. Maybe if I wanted to do five, I could do, you know, whatever. I just have to go on what our side out rate is and make it just a little bit harder. And then we have to get that. And that's something that I typically do. So it's just something I came up with, but it's not really rocket science. It's just thinking about where our weaknesses, um, how can we put the players under a little bit more pressure and relating that back to statistics so that you're actually doing something that they can achieve, but it is difficult to achieve. So, um, let's say team a, they get two out of three only. They rotate. They go from rotation one to rotation six, because we're just following truly a rotation here. Sometimes I will go from one to four and then back to practice and stuff like that. Today, I went really around a circle and then they serve. If the other game team gets three out of three, they rotate and they send this team, team a back into, um, rotation one. So it's kind of annoying too. And it means at least that you get to put, you, um, have a chance when you're in defense. It's not that you're just doing nothing. You're stopping yourself from like reversing. So you're in that kind of threat state as well. So I can put them in situations where they have to do something and they feel that like that challenge versus threat state. I don't know how much we've, you guys have looked at that, but like we act a lot different when we are like under threat than when we are taking on a challenge. And I so much want to get us to learn that everything is a challenge and just kind of go for it. But to do that, I need to as much as possible. And outside of games, it's difficult to put us into that threat state. So having to be moved backwards one is very annoying because it's very hard. Um, and that really forces. Us to like, okay, shit, I got to, I got to serve a good serve. Hey, let's get ready on defense, you know, and, and putting in that, in that threat state and working to be in that challenge state a little bit more. So that's what this game is. Um, we had a lot of, I had a lot of comments on it because there are a lot of little things that we could upgrade. It was the best time we did it. And I have a lot of smart players who are like, but what if we did this and this and this, and they're really good points. So later we can make some adjustments on the, on the drill. But, um, I think it was really, really helpful for us because it's. It, it just puts us in situations where we are a little bit more frustrated at the end. Like we have to do this or we can't rotate. Um, and that's, what's real because that's a game. So, no, great stuff. Cool. So most, most exercises that I have, uh, you know, I, of course I try to watch other people's practices. I watch like all the volleys, brains, master classes to get new practices and things like that. And, and, and drills, but at the end, like I still have to adapt them to fit to what my team needs. And so I'll always adapt. I'll always adapt the scoring. I'll always adapt. Like, but I, you know, there's different ideas. Maybe I want to work on setter, um, setter choices. So I will put a bonus point in some sort of drill that if they get a one-on-one, then they're going to get an extra bonus point or, you know, whatever I, uh, we're looking at at the moment that we need to really highlight that I want to work backwards and create an exercise for that. Um, the negative to this is that like, if people came into the national team gymnast summer, um. Yeah. I had four new staff and I had all like mostly new players. I think I had four of my players there, but at the end, um, quite often nobody knew what was happening. Um, because I change, like, I like to create drills based on what I think we need. So coaches went with me for a while. I, I kept working like that. So I see a benefit to, I try to name all my exercises now. So if we do it again, like everyone kind of knows what it is so that we don't freak out about it. Because like when we, when I, I learned this summer in the national team that if I'm changing things too quickly. Too creative. Um, it is difficult for people, but I also kind of like that difficulty because that's what a game is. So I, I just want them to go and play at the end of volleyball, like, um, you know, and so I think there's negatives and benefits of being creative, but I also. We talked even this year about, you know, making sure there are some somewhat like some consistency in some of the practices so that there are some elements sometimes of comfort for the players on at least the drill, because we don't want them focusing on the drill. We want them focusing on the volleyball. Yeah. But the drill enables them to put the focus on the volleyball. So you have to make that balance all the time. Exactly. And it's also going to stop sharing it. It's also a nice hack to, um, to have some kind of naming naming convention. Yeah. You name an exercise, something that everybody knows. Okay. You just have to call like, what was it? Setter better. Uh, which one? Yeah. Yeah. You just call something out and then everybody knows what they have to do, but then also, and I call. Yeah. Yeah. But the thing is also, of course, if you change a lot, then you can have like, okay, we're going to do this, but the variation is this and this, this, you know, so you have a starting point. Yeah. You can go on the starting point. Um, yeah. No. And then they, they know too. They walk in and they go setter better. And my setter is like, oh, well, whatever they laugh and they're fine, but you know, it's just like, kind of, they get mentally prepared that it's one of those dates. I'm interested in how you talk with players about, about their career. Also you talked about the weekly talks you have about stuff, like technical, technical, whatever. Uh, I guess also like a lot of, um. Yeah. Yeah. All that stuff. Just because it's. I mean, if I can about the individual meetings, cause I think that's really, it's been a hugest change in my coaching. So I coach like, I coached a men's team before and I thought that I was doing well on the players. Like, like, I don't care if the players like me, but they need to understand me. So I thought that everything was good. And then I did some meetings at the end of the year and found out like, you know, I probably need to do this more frequently. So then I was listening to a business podcast and they talked about these. Yeah. These weekly individual meetings, um, and they're structured. So they're 10 minutes like, um, and the, the, the, in this case, the athlete can come in and they can speak about whatever they want. So like, and we absolutely cannot interrupt them. We cannot, um, if they, if they want to say something that maybe could feel like offensive or stressful, like about playing time, we cannot judge them. We cannot give any reaction. We just need to take the feedback and then like hear them. Okay. Because I've found very often that like some players come in and a lot of players just use it to check in about volleyball. They say, Hey, this week I need to work on this, this, and this, this, this, and that. And then they have some questions. Some players like I'm really struggling with my boyfriend, my girlfriend's like, I'm feeling a little bit off this week. I'm going to try to get extra sleep, but like, I'm just letting you know, sometimes it's like, I don't know. You said something last week that like was a little bit offensive, but it could be literally anything, but having that space for them to do it means that we get it over really quickly. So we have a rule. Okay. Um, that I actually stole shout out to the Canadian national team. I was really great rule. Um, it's the 24 hour rule and it fits really well into the individual meetings as well. Like if you, if you need to say something or like get something off your chest, you say it within 24 hours or you get over it. Um, and you don't say it again, um, it's not a problem anymore, so just get over it. And so these individual meetings, like they kind of allow the same thing. If a player just needs to get something off their chest, it's gotten off. It's the start of the week. We go, we work, we're not holding onto anything. And it enables them to use it for what they want. Um, and mostly once people get the hang of it, it just, it leads into a check-in with their volleyball and it leads into a conversation like that. But I like to leave it open to whatever they need, because that's the whole point. Um, and they might say, Hey, I need some more video sessions this week. So we, we plan in video sessions. It can literally be anything, but we cannot be judgmental, which is really a challenge for a lot of coaches. Um, and yeah, and we, we just have to listen to them. And this has been one of the biggest changes in my coaching. Because it just, it, it enables me to listen to the players like frequently, um, and enables them just to, I don't know, they, they start to have a little bit more respect for my time for the work we're doing, like a lot of things, you know, and it becomes more of an exchange rather than just like them fighting against each other all the time. So it's very simple with everything you do, you give them, you show them how important that their career is for you. And that's, that's how also they treat their, they're going to make better decisions in the long, in the short and long run. For sure. If you're a coach who doesn't give a damn about your career, you're not going to make smart decisions. For sure. Not at those ages. And you can, you can catch red flags really easily, like a really big example right now is like the most, the greatest example is like my, like I said, my is playing right now and she hasn't really played this is the first time. And we are in some really big key games. And I spoke to her at the start of the year saying, you know, Hey, this is the year I want you to like, let's go, let's push because I think you can be a starter next year. And she's doing, she's doing quite well. But like, she's obviously not doing well. She's not doing as well as she would want because it's her first time. So why would you do that? Well, and she come in and she said, you know, she, she, she's like, I gave the illusion of being a good league, a player, but now I'm, I'm starting to show to everybody that I'm not. And I'm like, Oh, that is like a terrible red flag thinking. And I, if I didn't have the meeting to her to come in and tell me that she's worried about what everyone's looking at her, like that she's not succeeding with my club, like I wouldn't know that she's going down this terrible path and that's going to only hinder her performances. So. Yeah. So now we had a chance to talk through that. I mean, we don't need to talk about all that cause it's obviously bad self-talk, but like I wouldn't know that she's thinking that. And so that's very important. 