This is a drill we like to use a lot.
We always hope and dream that our teams are going to be putting that first ball to the target,
but unfortunately it doesn't happen nearly as often as we like.
So we have to learn.
One of the things that your teams have to be really, really good at is hitting at a system.
So we have a coach at each end of the court, and they're tossing a ball,
first ball to the setter on a ball that's probably 20 feet off the net.
And so they're having to deliver a ball to a hitter that's a tough ball.
It's an out-of-system ball.
And so we learn how to hit shots that are going to be effective and adjust to a higher ball
and have to transition off the net in a way that allows us to get a good swing.
And really good for outside hitters.
There's a nice drop shot by Kenneth Wollard,
one of our freshmen.
Nice defensive play there by Chloe, another one of our freshmen.
We're a really, really young volleyball team.
We really work hard, Matthias, on the drive shot.
It's not a shot that a lot of women use.
You have to have a really, really explosive arm and get great hand contact on the ball,
but I think that's something that we worked really hard at last year to develop.
And we've got some people that can really,
really drive the ball off the block and make it difficult on teams.
But this is a great drill.
Every team in America or every team in the world should be using this drill because it really
forces your setters, number one, to have to get on the horse and run balls down and then deliver a ball.
And when we're out of system, especially with non-setters, but even with our regular setters,
we want to be aggressive with that set.
I remember years ago, you would always, I think the rule was,
set the ball maybe five feet off the net, five feet in from the sideline when you're out of system
to give your hitter a fair chance and not make an error.
And now I feel like it might be more set the ball three feet inside the antenna and maybe a foot or two off the net
and let your athletes go up and be athletes.
And so that's kind of the routine we're following now is we're putting the ball tight to the net
and trying to create some kind of havoc.
And if you do it enough, you get good.
If you don't do it very often, then that's a really hard ball to get to and manage.
So, but that's, I think that's something that the more athletic you are, the tighter you're,
I think that your non-setter or your setter can set that out of system ball and give you a chance to score points.
Because if you're just going to give your opponent a down ball,
especially against the good teams in the Big Ten, you're going to end up losing the point.
