Usually they always start out with Pepper, but again, this is decided all by the guys.
So the guy on the far side at the net, he's the one that's running this.
It's hard to tell because they're all wearing the same thing, but he's right at the bottom of the Ohio State logo in the middle wearing a sheepish.
And that's Kyle Tooney.
Again, he's the one running this.
So it usually goes anywhere from 10 to 12 to 13 minutes.
You can kind of see him shouting out what's going to be next.
And literally there's no part of instruction from me.
He already knows exactly what I want.
He knows what the timing is that he's running this whole entire thing.
He's not looking to me for anything.
There's at times where he might look to me and say, hey, this drill's kind of run dry.
What do you think about doing something different?
And I'll give him a list and he can pick from it.
And then this is going to be a little bit different day.
So this is before our women's.
Later that day, there's a women's match, which is when there's the match court set up.
Usually we have the full four courts set up.
So this is the competition part.
It's maybe his choice.
And so she's running the whole entire thing.
They have full autonomy to decide whatever they want to do from a competition standpoint.
I just wanted the guys to compete.
And so I think they're doing like a it's almost like a modified basketball handball type situation.
Again, just kind of getting the guys in a fun, energetic way.
That's really what I want.
I want the guys to be energized.
I don't want them to be feeling blah.
I want them to be.
I want them to be ready to go and ready to work hard and ready to have some fun and get better.
And, you know, sometimes these games we learn, like sometimes if it goes too far in terms of the fun,
obviously it takes it takes away from their focus.
And I, you know, but I'm also OK airing on that side at times because, you know, this is a different generation.
And sometimes fun is OK.
You know, if you need to dial them back, sometimes it's OK to stop the other world.
I'd rather that rather than have fun and dial them back, then have them, you know, come into practice.
I haven't come in the first year old with.
A little energy, a little motivation, a little communication.
Exactly.
I think this from time's perspective, this goes like eight or nine minutes.
Yeah.
Which is typically that's that's the prize long if we've ever went and it was having fun and they're getting after it.
So it's kind of accomplishing what we felt was effective.
I think it was like top team went up and the winning team, the first round went up and the losing team went down or stayed long.
Oh, exactly.
You guys switch it up.
And.
Yeah, of course, the best is while you're playing the best because it gets get further and further from each other.
So you get more court.
You do that better in the cool part, too, that we we've kind of an indirect benefit of it.
The guys sometimes will have like it'll kind of inspire ideas they have to change it for next time.
Like, hey, what if we did this or that?
And it's, you know, I'm always looking for the guys to get autonomy as long as the autonomy was, you know, is is driven for the right reasons.
And for me, that's, you know, players are thinking about how to make something better to help them out.
You know, we'll try to better accomplish the goal.
Like, I'm all for it.
I love it.
Here's the idea.
Sometimes we adapt a little bit in practice, especially when we have one court.
So this is just this is purely just getting blocking reps against the live hitters.
We want realistic.
So in just kind of backtrack a little bit in general, philosophically, I want guys to get as many reps as possible.
I don't like standing around at all if I can help it.
And one court, again, makes that a little bit more difficult.
But sometimes we'll write drills, too.
And.
And also.
I'll see guys that are standing around or all before we even start.
I'll realize that's not a good drill for this.
There's going to be too many guys standing around.
They're not going to get enough reps.
But I think this drill kind of encapsulates my philosophy as a head coach is I want guys to get reps.
If we're going to do it, if we're not going to compete, I want me I want to make sure it's it.
We're going to maximize the time that we have doing that drill.
And we do like to compete in virtually everything that we do.
But this is an example, just a kind of red drill.
And every guy is is getting a rep.
And if you're not getting a rep, it's going to be a fairly quick rotation.
And with 19 guys on the team that's in one court, that's not always going to be easy.
But you'll very rarely see a line of more than three guys.
You'll very rarely see guys standing off or not participating for more than 30 seconds to a minute.
Again, just because I want to make sure we maximize the time that we have and make sure guys are getting.
As many reps as we possibly can, because volleyball is a repetition sport, as I call it.
It's like golf in the sense that you can get the best athlete in the world, like, say, LeBron James, and he can walk on a volleyball court day one and not be a high level player because it takes reps, takes time.
And so I've always thought of that in terms of how I practice.
And I want to make sure that we're maximizing the amount of reps that we get.
This is what we call just the half box drill.
We're just getting guys a lot of blocking reps against live attackers.
Were they?
We actually have to read which direction it's going, and we're trying to make it as realistic, but as simple as possible.
But we tell us we're all at it.
We'll just be front one go.
There'll be times where it's just a full offense.
There'll be times, you know, where it's out of system and it's just, you know, just two guys like or medium pass like this or even insist on this.
So we try to mix it up and create some variations on it.
But the overall idea is just to try to maximize reps.
One thing you'll notice, too, so very rarely we're all as coaches will be standing together.
Next.
To each other, because we're always trying to have, you know, give different perspectives and get constant feedback to these guys.
We always want to make sure that we're not over coaching them, but work that we're giving them quick, concise, direct feedback as often as we can to make sure that those reps are useful and beneficial and not taking you away from their game.
Well, that's something that I noticed watching, yeah, like I watched four hours of your video today, so so that there is always.
This is a great example.
Like every angle, there's somebody, you know, or at least two angles and you're never standing at your turn.
And that was actually something that we got Doug Beale made me aware of it.
It was I think it was something that I I naturally started to do years ago, you know, just but Doug Beale came and comes into our gym once a semester.
So twice a year, he'll spend a week once.
He's an alumni of our program and was one of the first coaches of our program.
And obviously his is.
Biography is incredible.
His accomplishments is incredible, but he he helps me that he's doing huge help.
And that was one thing he said early on early on when he first trips out was it's really important that you guys kind of space yourself out as coaches so that you can make sure to provide the same feedback.
And it's important, obviously, that you're on the same page as a staff, but it's going to be important that you guys are all giving similar feedback and that you're all seeing different angles of what's going on.
So I clean.
I can.
Just yeah, right now, you're going to take a break and I'm just going to skip forth a little bit.
It's just half a minute.
Yeah.
So this was fun.
I so this structure from the so on the weekly practice outline, we had server school microdressing, of course, the bottom.
But we adjusted.
We decided to do some offensive work on this one.
And with this this fall, we've done a lot of line work, a lot of attacking is what we wanted to do, and we want to be as clear and concise as possible.
It's a big thing that I try as a coach.
To be, but I also want to make sure that they understand that you're going to be in chaotic situations and you try to do this.
And there are times, too, where we just kind of let them be like we let them try to figure out their own, because as a coach, we know the importance of player leadership.
And, you know, it's one thing for us to tell them what we want them to do, but it's another thing to give them opportunities to do it.
And this is a good example of that.
So we do a drill called pipeline as well, and this is kind of this is kind of a drill warm of it.
So pipeline is.
We call it pipeline being you can get a kill through the middle of the court, typically the six on six version is you get a kill or a bonus point for a kill through the middle court, middle court kill being set or dump or quick fit kill has to be in system or line part being you get a bonus point for a kill down the line on either pin.
So this is kind of a drill form of that where we're just kind of repping where they're competing at each side is competing against each other.
But it's just kind of tossing balls, initiating ball side to side and giving them opportunities.
And it doesn't mean you can't.
It's just kind of throwing the ball down the line, being aggressive with some out of system stuff, guys that really struggle to hit the ball down the line, get pretty exposed pretty quickly.
Coles got hitting that pretty good.
Yeah.
So the guy left front, he's a freshman, first year kid, really good arm, but really struggles.
He gets underneath the ball quite a bit.
So he's struggling at the ball down the line.
So you can see his first swing there was kind of a throw down the line.
Saw the blocker bail out and just kind of went back to his comfort zone.
Also not great picking up touches the team this fall.
So it's all turning to non-center setting at system versus center.
So that's why either take or taking second ball.
Again, just adding chaos to it.
Yeah.
I didn't realize how bad our back row defense was in this game.
I try to be pretty clear with what my overarching priorities are as a coach.
And you'll see with this, there's guys getting reps and it's going to happen fast and we're not wasting time with it.
So you have, because even if the guys are confused and, you know, and let's say the drill isn't ideal for whatever reason, we're at least going to make sure we get reps.
We're going to make sure the guys are moving.
We're going to make sure the guys are getting quality feedback and that if it's not going well, we're still going to continue to give them feedback and make it clear what they need to be better at and good for.
So, uh, getting with this drill, you'll see that they're getting better, um, as you're in line, you're going to tell it, they're starting to force it a little bit more here, but yeah, they're definitely working on hitting down the line, um, and setting a middle of the court, especially a media pass.
So they're working on the split step and pushes what it looks like based on what we have in the plan.
So basically if it's served to your left, we want to work on landing on your split step, the correct timing where you're pushing off on your right to keep your body forward and enable yourself to be able to get the ball when you block around in front of your body.
We're trying to maximize reps.
So that's why we have those managers in there.
So make sure the guys aren't standing around.
It's tough with one core.
Any sermon pastoral can be taught in one court.
Um, Milan's art, which is the best at maximizing his assistant coach at Hawaii.
He's always been great sharing information and helping people learn.
Um, but he, you know, in Serbia, when he first started coaching, he had limited court space and a lot of guys and he wanted to maximize the opportunities and reps that he had.
Um, and so that's it.
Um, a guy that it's one of those things where I'm always thinking another one court, like it's hard, but that doesn't make it, it's not an excuse, right?
We got to find a way to make it better.
So this is just some, he's breaking down some reps that you can see the split step there from Kyle in the middle.
We're working on split step timing here.
Um, when we land, uh, and making sure that guys are pushing towards the ball, guys still throw it.
You say it takes a lot of reps.
We've wrote passing standpoint.
We found that's probably the most difficult, um, aspect of the game to apply that split step, especially from a timing standpoint.
Um, so on the split set, but at least at this point in the season, we were just working on down the line serves.
Um, we will progress to, to cross court times.
I think it was probably also just due to the fact that of limited court space, which is easier, probably hit down the line and get more people involved.
But I also like serving down the line or, or, or narrowing the court space for servers just to force them to force, to work on, uh, maximize the net control.
Folks don't get the feet to the ball.
I've contacted those types of things,
which as you can see, a lot of our guys need work on.
It is not about the perfect practice because the perfect practice does not exist.
So it's not about looking for those five minutes of perfect reception.
That will happen once a season now.
Sure.
Well, actually, but to your point, I mean, that's a big reason why I try to always keep my main priorities consistent, right?
Like if things aren't, you know, ideal, like a one court situation like this.
Okay.
What, what, what is important?
What do we have to have?
And that's just a match.
It's not about maximizing reps.
Um, that's, that's always going to be, and minimizing standing around all those is too many servers from our liking standing around.
But again, there's, that's why it's a shorter, shorter, uh, shorter drill for us.
Exactly.
From starting to serve to end like 10, 12 minutes, it's pretty short.
And then after this is going to be the, uh, at the blogging sequence.
So now we're into the, uh, the study 10 portion.
Majorly go to the start.
Yeah.
And so instead of, yeah, I wrote that outline with two different groups.
So we all just went in one group, um, because obviously one court, and then they'll switch to, to offense in the next session.
Well, we found the two that, I mean, this three man blocking is, is so rhythmic, right?
Like there's things that we just need to work out, rep out.
Um, we, we also, uh, aren't very good.
We've got a two week by Frank.
So it's just one of those things that you'll notice too, like the biggest issue that we see is guys are seem to be afraid to step on each other.
We always, my biggest thing with three man blocking is I always say it's better to step on somebody than just to land on somebody.
So guys are often afraid to step on somebody.
So that leads to a gap.
They ended up jumping to cover it and then on land ended up landing on them and causing more damage or injury than, uh, you know, what they would've, they just stepped on them and step wire.
We also talk about stepping behind, whether you're the third trail blocker or if you're in the middle.
Um,
there's obviously different ways to do this.
Uh, I've always liked kind of, uh, the international overseas model that you see more, uh, with the middle blockers kind of shuffling, especially in a, in a higher, higher setting situation where it's, or the one that passes further off and then blockers have more time.
Um, I'd like that just because from what I've noticed too, a lot of middles will, will drift late and then creating gaps.
And it just can be so technical and it adds just very with the swing block, rename block.
You just have so many variables that can go wrong.
Um,
but again, that's why we're just repping this out because we want to make sure that we're working through those variables as best we can to, to, uh, to minimize any potential, they go flat.
Well, the, the, you'll see a lot on this, and this is one thing we noticed throughout the fall.
A lot of the feedback we're giving is to that third trail blocker is to, to take bigger steps, um, and to get rid of reaching, which I think the trail blockers instinct is to reach towards the middle.
And, you know, the, the reality is they're going to block a level of balls, their left hand.
If you're going to the right and a lot more right handed, they're, they're going to the left by just going straight over.
And so that's a lot of the feedback that we're getting in this, uh, in this sort of a drill, but it's also quick progression, right?
So you'll see, we're just going to rep things out like this.
Um, and then we'll progress towards, we're adding the ball and getting some live attackers in.
Yeah, exactly.
This is like at max two minutes and a half, you know, just some, you'll see, you know, they're working with our, these are grad students that just came in.
This is his first year with us.
Um, and we're just talking, I'm just pointing out the fact that we're, he's clearly afraid of stepping on guys and we're talking about when he crosses over, um, in the corner of his eye, he's thought he's thinking he's going to step on their, on their right foot.
In reality, he's got a lot more room and he thinks that's just me kind of walking through it with him.
So, yeah, it's, it's just, we're, we're mixing it up and kind of putting it in some different out of system situations.
Um, it's a lot of error, correct too.
So, um, if there isn't an ideal.
Connection will typically add it.
We'll, we'll throw it back to that side.
Uh, if there's a pure air and then it's from there, they can play it out and get back.
It's getting back into our defensive system, which we have eight new guys on the roster this year.
So there's a lot of learning in terms of the system as well.
Um, which is, it's loosely based on hobby or whatever system that he brought to the U S or they even created.
I'm fairly certain it's pretty common in the U S now.
Um, since the five option system, um, pretty simple, uh, hobby or system.
It was far more complicated than, but again, for us, it's, it's a little bit more simple.
Um, but again, so a lot of this is not only three-man blocking, uh, around system blocking, but also getting guys within the system.
Um, especially as rallies go on and go into transition, Tommy is a huge aspect of it too.
You'll see a lot of our, and we want to make sure that we're our, uh, our vision is in the right spot, just as our pin blockers are lining up in the right spot, um, when the.
We're out of system, three-man block or two-man, uh, when also, as you all know, like as a blocker, if you're up early attackers at this level, and especially at the parallel that you played at, they're gonna be able to see it and go around pretty much any day.
So being, uh, being strategic with our block timing, regardless of the situation or the past quality, uh, is going to be, is something that we really prioritize, um, just to, again, to, to make it a little more difficult, uh, for the opposing attacker to make decisions.
Um, you know, I also really like this one there.
Yeah.
And that's just how the game's changing, right?
Like we're trying to adapt, like we don't, there's no more, you know, high tips to keep the ball in play anymore in the men's game.
I mean, there is to a certain degree, that's all you have, but, you know, we certainly want to coach a lot more, um, line attacking in general, but especially, uh, throwing balls into the seam of the block or throwing balls down low, got a lot like that.
We, we coaching to keep the ball in front of them.
To avoid any, uh, ball handling errors being called, but, um, you know, it, it's something that we, we've really trained into our guys.
Hudson, our, our associate head coach on the left at the, uh, he's in the half full running this drill.
He's done a really good job incorporating that and then J our guys.
This is the one where again, there's, there's two scoreboards on each side and they're kind of basically competing against trying to, trying to earn 17 points before they gave up eight.
And there'll be times too, where, you know, we, we will play another six on six game until they get, until they earn 17 before they get eight, you know, so just kind of putting that and forcing them to prioritize that balance.
And it's, as a coach, it's tough, right?
Like, I don't want to be the coach that says, oh, you can't miss here.
You can't make, can't make service.
And it's the tough thing, right?
And a lot of the skills in volleyball, you got to serve tough, but you can't miss.
You got to be aggressive, but you can't make errors.
You know, it's, it's, uh, it can be tough.
It can be tough to find that balance.
And that's why I think drills like this are so important is to really help our guys find what it means to play with some balance.
The other part of this game too, is that they'll realize like, if they're playing this game with a mindset of being afraid to, to make errors, they're never gonna, they're never gonna earn 17 before they give eight.
If it's, if it's, if it's, if it's, if it's, if it's, if it's, if it's, if it's, if it's, if it's, if it's, if it's, if it's, if it's, if it's, if it's, if it's, if it's, if it's,
you know, so it's, it's trying to play smart, but also play in a way where you're thinking aggressively.
The simple thing that I preach to them is just, I want you guys to be thinking about how you're going to score points.
I never want, in an ideal world, I never want you guys to be playing with fear.
I don't want you to be afraid to make mistakes.
I don't want you playing, you know, afraid to serve a ball out of bounds.
It's just, you're not going to win games doing that.
You're not going to be at your best doing that.
You know, it's easier said than done with our,
sport but if we can put them in situations where they're going to learn that they're not going to
be successful doing that um on top of us telling them that as a coaching staff i think we'll be in
better shape i think in general i'll every for every word that are every every concept or key
that i tell our guys i want to give them opportunities where they can learn how to
do it on their own too in practice yeah doing this mic top would be the full embrace dream like
it's gonna make it so so awesome yeah if you ever want to do it i'm open to it you know we've done
before i i mean from a coaching staff when i i john's probably was actually the first that i
heard that had done it where he had a applied sports psychologist he miked him up for practice
and then
they just watched it together and went over how thing what he was doing was effective or wasn't
and how guys certain guys could receive information or how they couldn't um and i think that's
important because listen the the these this age group of guys are they're changing it's different
than what we were coaching the type of guys were coaching 10 years ago and you know i think the
easy thing as a coach is to do all we can't coach these guys the same way anymore well yeah we have
to learn how to adapt to help them as best we can it's you know it's to terry's credit it's the art
of coaching right
of trying to adapt and help people and challenge them as best you can and i think even a mic'd up
it's crazy to say but i do think it can help a lot i mean as a especially as a head coach your
job is to manage people and to get the most out and you know assistant coaching i think is a lot
more about volleyball and a little more about the the micro aspect of the game and you know
that's literally one of the more important things that you do and it's hard to be aware of it
sometimes and you know i watching i mean my first year looking back and being surprised that i'm
more naked my body like it wasn't i thought it was you know that i was going to be able to do it
and i you know i i thought it was at least in my head you know and there's times too where i
wouldn't say enough or i was waiting to say almost i was trying to say the perfect thing and you know
and there's time the first year doug veal was with us and he was sitting right behind the bench for
one of our matches and he said and you don't have to say the the most amazing thing sometimes it
can just be very simple and the guys might know it but that's just in hearing it from you can be
really really important um you want to blow their mind it's just to be short and simple and that
remembering that i don't have to you know i don't have to reinvent the wheel i don't it's not rocket
science it's just you know what's what do they need these things a big one for myself
uh was something that john dunning said so it was an interview for it was a zoom call and that was
it was so simple and it is so simple so i'm explaining it to you now like it's the most
awesome thing but it's so simple but i'm still not doing it and i have to force myself to do it
and it's like listen to somebody explain don't go in there with the solution that you think you
already have prepared he gave example that he's a mathematician and he's always looking for the
solution but his biggest unlock was just let somebody explain what their problem is and you
and during their explanation maybe they figure it out themselves you know but they just never
had somebody to talk to they were always in their own head like figuring it out by themselves
solving their overthinking my thinking more
probably never like some useful thing to do so this is something you said it's this is
so obvious i mean i agree with you i think it's really important i do think it's bigger than
what it might come across as because i think a lot of times i've seen guys kind of explain their
problem and also realize at the same time it's not nearly as big of a deal as they thought it
was in their head or it's not nearly bad or negative as they thought it was in their head
as they start to talk and explain it so basically we'll stop this game stops as soon as one team
gives eight hours
17 or 17 we'll also play a game it's called uh red zone um we do a serve and pass game based on
the two um so basically it's uh depending on what the levels are so it's like all a side versus b
side then we'll start the b side up like 1917 um but if it's even then we'll start 17 17 um and if
they miss the first serve of the game it's an automatic loss if they miss two serves in a row
to automatic loss if they get an ace on the first serve of the game it's an automatic win same thing
two serve two aces in a row automatic win um and then we'll do uh a serve and pass drill based on
that's called nine ball serving where um only the passers um try i know i'm so sorry it's the
nine ball serving they um get a point if they get uh it's a three point scale they get a point if
they get a flash do they it's a two point or a three point pass if it's a one pass or worse
the server you get the point um and they play
first team of five but also on top of that if it's a first serve air auto loss first erase
auto win same thing two aces in a row two errors in a row uh just to try to put some pressure on
from the online and again it's just another but also incorporate the ballot kind like you all
all want it to be a negative mindset or all positive mindset where it's a score only or
error score only
what we do on that alone
that'd be a game just at 15
sometimes we'll if we do play a normal rally score game which we'll we'll do at times before
like so this is our last practice before we had a fall or a pre-season tournament the next day
um and so sometimes before we play we'll play i guess a 15 minute 15 point game to impact on i
think that's what this one is yeah which which is gonna be probably your starting six at that
side the receiving side and this actually isn't um we have uh well actually it is i think about it
um we have some guys we're still hasn't really been set yet
um and stanislaw's not there also so um it's also part of the reason why but uh yeah it's still a
little bit of a mix and we have an outside that also plays opposite he's probably our backup
opposite um he's on the on the near side left front right now blonde haired kid um and so we
we're trying to get him some reps at opposite just in case but he's we'd love for him to be
our starting outside and long but far opposite went down or left-handed opposite went down he'd
need a backup more than likely
and getting some guys that don't play a whole lot in um towards the end also maybe got the
knee sleeve on he was allowed to see all middle front because he got well that much to push you
down with a little bear on this side too his uh actually an animal recommend to you all as well
his dad is the head coach of western kentucky um he's been there for 30 plus years has turned down
big time job opportunities and he's been there for a long time and he's been there for a long time
and he's been there for a long time and he's been there for a long time
multiple big-time job offers he's just a i went to their practice when i was recruiting him
um and he's just a it's a really really good trainer really good teacher of the game um
you said you said what women said travis hudson he's a guy that i would recommend as well
if you want to rewind that play actually we we created a
it's not it's on your shattering but it's uh it's a rule that we created it had it been
i think yeah actually we created before this i was i definitely got on them for it
um but you can never tip out of balance so in other words you can't tip sideways you got to
find hands first before you try and swipe you got to push forward or finish i always say finish
straight right so if you're hitting a lot of you have finished straight if you're tipping a liner
we're trying to throw it you got to finish you got to finish straight on that last play
and you try to throw it out of balance and by trying to get the right the outside hand
kind of drives me nuts we i when we before we made that rule i asked the team so what do you
think we're hitting what do you think our attack efficiency is when we when we tip the ball
sideways out of balance trying to hit that that hand i said well negative i'm like well why do we
do it 90 of the time when we try to get the outside hand you know so i was trying to give
them the rationale behind it a little bit but yeah it's something that it seems you know that
rule the errors on it dropped dramatically in practice and it sounds like i don't think it
was something our guys really thought about you know from a critical thinking standpoint you know
if they really thought about what they were hitting from the sacrificial season when they
tried to tip it out sideways they realized it wasn't it was doing a lot of damage um and i think
some of those things are the things they start to think about um when we play games like we're
not given play games like red zone yeah exactly you do that rather put a rule in place instead
of them having to you know play it for eight it wouldn't be aggressive ability alternatively
gotta go straight to the end
so this will last seven minutes so then there is i think most of the guys stop now and then
yeah it's just probably extra reps yeah yeah
so there's a bit of everything probably the liberals on the side
yeah it's just guys have uh a lot of our guys have class but well the guys that don't are
free to go to locker room they won't they're free to get extra reps since they walk
um especially i like to do this a lot when we have one court just so that you know if there are guys
that feel like they want to get more reps and didn't get as many as they normally do during
practice they have the opportunity to do so for as long as they need
and guys like luke who's hit in boston far side and then megan had been great
and then after this a lot of guys will come up for a video with the coaches to go over as well
it's just good yeah it's just the same
and some yeah some less reps here yeah managers getting some reps
it's it's it's important to keep on greasing with armen oh yeah
