This is setters, the S's and the bros.
The first four minutes, it's warming up mobility and stretching.
I can't let it play.
It's just warming up.
It's just a dynamic warm-up.
After this is running lines, warm-up, and then it's couples, it's pepper.
Let me go to the four-minute mark.
Okay.
So, yeah, running lines.
Let me just go to the pepper.
I think maybe it's important to set the stage a bit here.
Again, like we talked about, what part of the season is this,
and what is your preseason approach?
Because everybody's doing a bit of everything where we are at.
I think that's important to go over.
Yeah.
All right, so this is August 14th.
We're in about our second week of preseason.
Some of these days, we're doing two practices.
I think this was just one practice today.
And we bring in our…
We bring in our liberos and DSs and setters before the rest of the team.
We do that to give them extra reps.
And, you know, I think at times, we've got to be careful with outsides and middles,
you know, how many jumps they get.
So we're always monitoring that.
So this is just – I call this grab-ass warm-up here.
They're just kind of warming up.
I'm probably not even down here yet.
So this will be warming up, and the setters and liberos will go over to a court
and work on setting and passing.
And then the setters will come in here and start setting.
They're over on the wall right now warming up.
We have a slant board they're warming up on
and doing some other things just to get them warm, ready to go.
Good stuff.
I can go to the next timestamp, but it's mid-17,
and that's setters.
You see them already on the cordon right, but I'll take the exact point.
Yeah, they'll come over here in a second.
Yeah, so you're going to see that right now.
Yeah.
All right, so here we're just – we're giving setter reps.
And typically, we always have a theme every day, what we want to work on.
Right now, we've got one setter on the – you can see on the right court there.
On the right side is working on what we call a go set.
We put the boys on the targets to give them targets so they have a visual image
to know if it's a good set or not based on if the guys can hit it.
And then the other thing is we like to do – we like to toss a lot from zone one.
I don't know if Europe it's different, but for us, zone one is right back
where our coach is tossing here.
And just so they have – they get practice of that ball coming over their shoulder like that.
It's a little tougher when the ball is coming from there
than from the other side of the court.
So – and then if you see on the left side, right now, there's – those setters
or liberos are working on setting over there.
So it's just a – somebody's digging a right back,
and they're just working on setting the targets.
So we got – we have a great setup because we have –
we have three courts so we can really break it down on what we're doing
and get a lot of reps.
We're working on – we would call this kind of a medium system set.
She's coming off the net.
So the coach is tossing.
So she's coming off the net and just working on setting what we call the red zone behind
from not – you know, just not a perfect pass.
So, again, we're always working on something.
So we'll warm them up with perfect passes, and then we're going some type of deal.
Sometimes –
like right now, she might be giving her a perfect pass and then one off the net.
We'll do about 10, 12 reps, and then we'll flip.
So one's working on the go set, and then –
and we'll just switch the setters.
So they're working on both – setting to both zones.
Perfect.
Again, that's what we see here, like one perfect reception and then a ball off the net.
Yeah.
Yeah.
But that allows us to get a few more reps because we're always just replicating coming off the net.
We have to wait for them to go back and come off, wait for them to go back and come off.
Now we can get us rep.
Now we can come off, go back and get a good rep, come off.
So it helps us get more repetitions.
And one of my – one of our themes at Nebraska is we call it Race for Reps.
We're going to try to get more reps than every other team we train against.
So we try to design.
We try to design our practices so we can get as many reps as possible
because I just feel like we only have – everybody has the same amount of time to train.
So who can be the most efficient and get the most repetitions in that time period?
And we can't train all year round.
So it's a – we basically have about three weeks and we're playing.
So that's what these practices are.
And so how many reps can we get without overjumping them?
That would be the keys.
All right, so what we're going to do here is we're going to go live, pass, set, hit.
And we set our – we set our guys and we're going to work on – right now we're working on a big set
or some people call it a pipe set.
We're just working on that relationship where we want to be depending on the pass.
And so we're just – we like to – whenever time we – whenever we can train setters,
we like to do it with live hitters because we think it just gives them a feel of, you know,
where's the hitter?
Can I find the hitter?
Can I find the hitter?
And, you know, the analogy –
The analogy I use is a football analogy.
I mean, quarterbacks can go out in football, American football, and throw to targets.
Okay, but in a game, the receiver's always moving.
They're coming back.
They're going one direction or the other.
So they've got to be able to find those receivers.
It's no different than a setter.
They've got to be able to see the pass and then find that hitter and put that hitter in a good spot.
So we – every day we – and these are our grad managers that we have.
And these guys all have played volleyball or played volleyball in high school.
And so we have them in practice.
And, again, I think it's the best way to train setters.
Okay, so this will be the next evolution.
Now we're going to go to what we call our go set.
And we're moving our passer around.
And she's actually going to move the setters here.
So these are not perfect.
She is – we call it – I don't know if you can see it.
We have a triangle out there in the court.
So we're going to move them in the triangle around to set.
So, again, and we watch video with our guys to show them so they understand what kind of set we were trying to set for our players.
So they can give the setters feedback.
Hey, that's too low.
That's too high.
It's too slow.
It's too far inside.
And what we're – the reason we – we're going to move the setters here.
We put the noodles up.
We call those noodles.
They're swim noodles for the kids.
The reason we put those up is we want our – the guys hitting, we want them to be able to hit inside the noodles, like right there, or outside the noodles.
We kind of simulate that's a block.
If they have to hit in that block, then that set wasn't a great set.
So that is giving us feedback on – to the setters if they can hit with range.
That's the whole goal right there.
So that was kind of a – right down the middle there.
So that wasn't a good swing, or he couldn't move it.
There's a great swing.
He can cut it inside the block.
He goes outside the block.
So, again, we want to expand our range as much as we can.
That's the visual for them to do it.
So right there, he – that kid's just right out of high school.
He just – you know, that shot would have been right in the block.
So we're trying to get setters to set.
Can you set a ball that they can hit?
Wherever they want.
That's essentially the goal.
And that was a pretty nice set right there.
So they know how fast can I go?
How slow do I need to do it?
Where can I put it?
So, again, this is just all – as we like to say, Matthias,
the ball is the teacher right now.
So the setters are setting that ball, and that ball is teaching them
by watching them hit if it's a good set or not.
Exactly.
And going back to the thing we talked about before,
like even though this is just the second week,
this is pretty solid setting already for our second week, of course.
This is probably about our sixth day of practice is what I'm guessing.
And, Matthias, just what we like to do in our preseason is we like to –
we go six days of training.
Two or three of those days will be twice a day.
No jump in the morning.
I'll serve and pass and ball handling.
In the afternoons, we're jumping and hitting.
And then the seventh day would be the day –
a day off, a recovery day.
So that's kind of our model of how we do things.
Exactly.
It was what I was also thinking with this practice.
I was like, it's three hours.
Most videos I get are long.
But then the first 45 minutes, there's nobody in the gym.
It was just about the recording.
And I was going through it.
I'm like, oh, yeah, okay, this is pretty long already.
But, yeah, it's not that your setters are jumping now or whatever.
It's not that the spike is over here.
It's not that it's six against six for two and a half hours.
Right.
So here we went into the second exercise.
You have five big and the option for the setter too.
Yep.
So now we're working on the setter moving forward and back setting.
So this passer here, this DS, is bringing them forward.
And they're working on setting either the big zone or the red zone.
So they got two hitters going.
They can set either one.
And, again, we're just working on this situation right here.
How are we going to get a good swing?
Who do we want to set?
And if you remember earlier, we were coming over there setting the go zone from that zone.
So that's what we're working on right now.
And we pass a lot of balls over there because a lot of teams will serve your front row hitter over here on the big, the B-I-G,
where they're passing and hitting to slow them down.
So a lot of the passes go straight ahead.
So that's what we're repping right here.
When it goes there, what can we do?
So Kelly, our setter coach here in the lower left, she's giving those setters feedback on their footwork.
And that's all she's watching right there.
I tend to be watching more of the tempo and the location right now to give them feedback on that.
The goal of setting back, you know, like in these kind of situations, depending on your own, the opposite that you have or you're starting opposite,
is it to really like get the ball as far as the antenna?
Because in a lot of these kind of situations with ball of the net, with receiving of the net, it's not that bad even like to have the ball.
Yeah, let me just go back.
It's not that bad to set even like three feet, whatever, inside of the antenna, you know, because then you're going to cut it anyways.
What is your like, what is general approach?
Like let's try to get it to the antenna anyways, set it back or?
We, we,
the ball would land on the floor would be outside the sideline and the, and the red part of the court there.
But again, I want, I'm thinking what ball can I put up there that they can hit inside those noodles or outside those noodles or high off the noodles,
especially if it's a longer distance set, because it's not going to be as accurate when it's a perfect pass.
So can they put it up there that those guys can hit with range that, and that's what, that's the feedback that the boys, the guys are giving them.
Hey, good swing, good set.
I can hit that.
Man, I, I, you know, I, I,
I can only hit one shot there and then, so that's the feedback they're getting.
Right.
So here, yeah, you already saw what's happening.
Yeah.
So now we're probably going to quick attacks again, just repping it.
This would be, we got, let's see if I got two hitters going here or they just messed up.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Now they messed up.
Yeah.
We got, we got two hitters going, so they got,
they can decide who they want to set.
And again, our, our passer here is going to move those setters around.
So we want it to be kind of random that it's not always just a toss to them.
It's off a live passer.
And again, the more we can get the live passer, the better.
And having two hitters going, they can make the decision on who they want to set.
Like how your position for is like gathering his approach here.
I think this is already the quickest set you have.
The four, right?
Yes.
Yes.
Yeah.
We, this is a, you know, we run a lot of, we call them dogs or slide attacks out to the antenna off one leg.
This is one we're going to cut off.
So the blocker just can't always release out there.
They got to know, am I coming inside or I coming outside?
So this is the set that keeps them honest.
All right.
So our next, our next evolution is, and we're getting organized.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
We're getting organized here.
Our next evolution is to go with three hitters and make it out of transition.
So we're going to get moving here.
And then we're going to go with cover balls.
So we're going to go multiple balls here.
Typically we go four.
So there's three and we're going to go the fourth one.
So again, we're kind of overloading the setters right now with three hitters and four balls coming over.
So the first one's out of transition and the next one will be simulating cover ball.
Why is everything going so fast?
Go back back.
And again, it's not necessarily game speed in having blockers.
It's just more of giving these setter reps.
And again, our little passer here is moving those setters.
So it's not perfect every time.
And we tell her to vary the height of the pass, the tempo of the pass, and the location of the pass.
So the setters can kind of be creative here on who they set and just, again, working on things.
in different situations their goal is always to get four good swings out of four good
passes that's their goal so they kind of have a little competition going
and if you look at on the court on the left there on the black court the rest of our team came in
and now they're warming up so they're going to get ready to join practice here they're going
through a dynamic active warm-up and typically these setters will be out here for 30 minutes
at this time of year so 30 minute 30 minutes a setting burst basically
these guys jump hundreds of times in a practice because we use them so much so it's great to have
them because they're they get in great shape and again our setters just get a lot of live reps
and we're not doing it with our players they're working on working all this out on the guys
as opposed to you know we only have three middles so how many how many quick tacks can they hit
every day you know and still stay healthy so that's what we got to manage and uh and this
gives our setters a lot of reps exactly this guy in the middle just keeps on going yeah
that he was ready for this yeah
you
yeah yeah he's he's great we actually uh he's he's hired temporarily right now in jordan larson's
place as a coach here um he's kind of on a tryout he's he's just finishing his second master's
degree and he's uh um he's gonna be a really good coach we might go to the center front row
after this is what i'm thinking so you can see they're putting up good sets we're counting them
as a four in a row
and um that's their goal you know again if you're getting a long rally you can put up four good
balls in a row a row we're probably got a pretty good chance of winning that rally
so we're gonna go center front row now we're gonna work on um a set when the when the left
front player plays a ball if they don't have time to get back out we got to have a audible that we
can call to still set them yeah so that's we're kind of working on that and we're gonna go to the
they stay in do they stay out we got a back row attack going so we're just working on our five
we call our five one transition
and what i like about this is to sometimes that just like in a match the big hitter may be in
there the big hitter may not be in there so it forces the setters to think and listen who's who
are my hitters right now do i have a big hitter because maybe the big hitter gets taken out with
a dig or something so it really it really puts pressure on those setters to be aware of what's
going on and and perform all this under pressure and find their hitters
so right now the big hitters out so they got to figure something else out
on the other court over here now uh we got coaches on boxes serving balls to passers so
those are the those are liberos while the rest of the team's still warming up on the black court
so they're just we're just getting we're getting reps right now off boxes just repping the those
passers grooving them what we call
grooving them just good good float serves so let's get it they get rhythm passing and get
comfortable and get a lot of reps a lot of touches this is pretty much every practice this is how we
start uh we call partner warm-up so they're working on arm swing right now trying to get
them to throw correctly like an athlete and then they'll go into a series of ball handling exercises
but we all this is one way we try to warm up their shoulders you can see the setters are back in this
the other thing we do here is we we mix up partners every day so they don't go with the
same people every day and now we're going to work on just call hand contact hand you know
putting their hand on the ball and they're going to work on some shots here they'll work on
cutting the ball both ways they'll work on an off-speed shot so it's just again kind of a warm
up and again we want to get their hand on the ball and manipulate the ball a little bit
they'll do this every day you know they'll get better at having good hand contact cut shots
they'll hit away from their body so they have they have about four shots they're working on
you can see some of them miss we're also trying to get them to rotate to hit all right so these
are our pepper series we call it pepper series and this would be what we call one-way pepper so uh
we're going to do this for time or we're going to get 20 in a row so we just vary it on the day
depending on how fast we want to get through it obviously if we say we're going to go for a number
of in a row we may be there for a while till they get it so uh i'm guessing i'm not sure what we're
doing here if it's a goal or we're on time but we're going pretty long now we're going to switch
and again this is just again getting reps arm swing reps they're working on getting their
feet to the ball because not every dig's perfect and they're working on trying to control their
digs yeah today's for time there's some days we'll we we're willing to stay here for quite a
while till they get it if we say we got to get 20 in a row for example i can honestly say those
worst type of warming ups i had to do in my time but yeah i know that coaches love them well just
just so you know the world the world record in this gym was when i hit i hit to my daughter she
dug 157 in a row yeah but it's not it's not about what a couple can do it's about what
10 couples can do at the same time you know you also know that you just need one shifty
middle that messes it up for everybody oh i know i know yeah they they uh and they do
yeah um that's why after this one i've written down digging warm-up exercise so curious what
that will be okay let me just go to the starts okay this is a great drill right here this this
might be my my favorite drill uh for communication for talking to get them get the energy going we
call it six person
effort so you can see it's dig set hit by three people on a side and what's great about this
drill that they have to they have to see where the set goes and adjusts because everything's going
cross court and they have to just call who's going to set who's going to hit it so it's a
tremendous drill to communicate the first time they do this it is ugly and just everybody's
all over the place but once they figure it out it's a great drill and we do this
drill most days again because i want to get them talking i want to get the energy going if they've
been in class all day or they're tired or it's a morning practice they uh you know it gets their
energy going and then you can also see who right there who kills the rallies you know who shanks
balls who misses their hits and then you find out who your best communicators are who who sees
what's happening here you know and can adjust and they're all talking about what's happening here
great drill i highly i highly recommend this drill for any any volleyball team to do
so now we go to um the the setters are probably over working on attacking and everybody else is
working on short court so this is tight plays at the net we're working on and uh so just working
on you know wiping the ball off the block we let the guys get in here with this just because
we're so good at it playing men's volleyball so we're just going to work on you know these little
plays and um yeah they love this drill
oh sorry go ahead no no go ahead i i know what you're going to say so i was i was aiming for
that yeah yeah this drill scares me a little bit because it you got we got to make sure they're
under control and not coming under so we harp on them about that we try to
sit there and watch them and then we don't have the liberos do this uh because they don't do in
a game and they're small so it's not realistic but they they love this drill it's you know we
don't do this they're they're complaining no a lot of trash talk goes on in this drill too
like like it should be uh no it's it's exactly that be under the ball be at the net
don't try to like figure something out of the net because then
you will lose this this kind of thing we started doing this because a lot of teams are setting
tighter that is as college teams tend you know continue to push the tempo it seems like the
setters miss tight a lot so we're doing this not only how to defend it but also if we get a tight
set and we try to we try not to set that tight and keep it off the net maybe more than other teams
because i want our players to get swings uh so this just helps them if it gets tighter but also
we got to learn how to defend it
because it's going to happen so now we go to serving um and uh this is how we start off
serving we call it one-legged serving and we start off every practice serving with this drill
what this does if you're serving on one leg you're uh if if the ball teaches you if you have a good
toss or we call it a lift so if i don't toss the ball in front of my right shoulder if i'm right
i'm going to fall over on one leg so it teaches them and again especially with younger players
if you have you know 14 players out there it's really hard to go and correct 14 players so right
now i can let the ball be the teacher if you toss it right in front of your right shoulder great
it's a great toss and you get that feedback if you miss that toss you're going to get feedback
you got to be better than that so this is how we start off it's also a good warm-up and you know
you notice we're going to be a little bit more active and we're going to be a little bit more
closer here as the season moves on we will back up and be on the end line one one-legged serving
but it takes us a while to get there so we just want to have a good warm-up here serving off one
leg we're still partner serving so now we're just standing on two feet from the end line
and just working on a you know low line drive float serve and we're giving a feedback did you
float your serve or does it have spin on it
so and they're just trying to serve straight to their partner so again the ball is teaching them
is it a good toss if i miss my toss i'm going to miss my target or to my partner
so we're just trying to go line line drive right to our partner
so what i'm explaining here is we're going to shorten the court so we're going to go into the
court and again we're the ball is going to teach us here so we're working on getting great hand
contact that i can be 10 feet into the court and still serve it in so i've got to figure out how do
i control my ball so we're really working on touch and control right now uh and but being so close
where we normally would be and you can see they right right there she gets that high it goes out
too low it's in the net so if they hit it just right and get a really good
hand contact there's a great one right there so they're working on manipulating the ball
so this again is part of our serving routine we go through
and they get really good at it and it helps them get that serve that kind of goes and drops in
so right there i saw one got behind her head a little bit if it gets behind their head it's
going out guarantee you
oh good so i also i really love that you're so yeah deliberate about the steps it makes
sense
it's building out the bill you know where you have to be that's that's exactly what we try to do is
build into it every drill every sequence everything we're working on and we do it every
day we're building into it we this is our we do this every day so you could ask one of our players
10 years ago at this time in practice what are you doing they'll tell you one-legged serve
in line 20 foot line serve and then eventually here we'll go live
what you're saying is i don't need you for this video actually like i can like
do the video call with anybody that has been in the process yeah but matthias here here's what i
discovered in coaching is these players love routines i love routines when we and we like to
have routines in everything we do so one of the ways you build confidence is by doing this every
day in that routine they're going to be able to do it every day and they're going to be able to do it
every day and they're going to build confidence from this because they know what we're doing they
know the drill and they know what the goal is the ball's teaching them so when they do it over and
over correctly and continue to do that then they're going to build confidence now i should say
internationally you know middle blockers serve on the red court over here to the right or the wood
court uh our middles are not serving right now we have them serve later in practice because we don't
because we're saving their jumps but they're over working on blocking right now so we we got
everybody's doing something they never stand around yeah now our sequence we go to the libero
setting uh they were setting earlier in practice if you remember and we're going to set our guys
here and go against the block so they get feedback is it a good set can the guys hit around the block
or are they getting stuffed can they tool the block and they you know and then we got the coverage
if they do block it so
this is pretty game like but they're always going to we're going to set the guys right now so and
later in the year we'll set our players but again we're making this game like
and the setters are figuring out where to dig it and the barrels are getting reps on how they want
to set i'm doing a little more explaining here to normal because it's early in the season
uh and then this play right here we'll have our setter or sorry
we're going to have our setter or sorry
go over there and try to put it up there so we can kill it
normally after we get going here uh this this might be the first or second time we've done this
we will uh i'll just call it out setter
dig we're going to go 25 kills boom we're into it we don't like to spend a lot of time explaining
but that's about as much explanation as they're ever going to get from me right there
you can see we brought our middles back we'll see our setter kelly just shanked one to the
middles because they sometimes have to set and then you know if it comes back we go ahead and
play volleyball so this is our blocking sequence now we're going to work into blocking so we want
to get reps here so we have three three courts going the black court we're using softballs like
the elementary school kids using the playground and we're working on shaping and blocking with
one hand so again we're just letting them reach outside their body inside their body to block
there's a sequencer
going through we want to get their hand over and shape you know we believe in blocking how you
shape your hand is where the ball is going to go just like in passing or setting you know it's all
the same so instead of just putting our hands straight up and over we want to shape it and put
it back in the court so we want to teach them how to do that the middle court here we're working on
a live block and we're going to work on blocking with two hands and uh we're again we're working
on shaping and trying to direct a
back in the court i'm tossing on this so we can get a consistent toss and the guys can hit
consistent shots and then on the wood court as you can see we are going and touching uh guys have
balls uh on boxes so they're just going up and getting their hands to the ball and getting their
hands over the net feeling how to get over so we're in this middle court here where i'm tossing
we break this down sometimes we're working on blocking line sometimes it's cross court
sometimes we just say hey you block what you see so we're really trying to give them freedom
blocking and we we we shape outside our bodies and we could do a whole podcast uh uh one of
these sessions on blocking uh about our our philosophy on blocking look john one day one
day when you when you'll retire when you have more time to do this let's do yeah i love blocking
one of my favorite things and then
to to make it even more clear for people watching like because what you just said was how you shape
your hands is how you'll block like how you direct the ball to the court but you what you didn't say
or the purist here you didn't say that you're gonna block the ball with your hands you just
said like if your hands are direct to the court your arms probably will also be right yes yes
yeah so uh we have a very sophisticated way we chart blocking
and compared to our opponents and we may not necessarily block as many stuff as many balls
but we touch a lot of balls way more than our opponents because we allow our players to shape
so as you can see in this middle court right now so we're working on blocking lines so we're gonna
we're gonna work on shaping that ball ball down the line a lot of times when people block line
they go straight up it just hits off this part of their arm and goes out of bounds we're gonna
shape you can only hit my hands that's what we're working on you got to hit my hands and i'm shaping
the court she just did a really nice move right there here's a she didn't quite get there and
drifted so she's going to go again here yeah this she's she was a transfer so this is all new to her
right here but you see right there so we're kind of breaking it down for her and then we go so many
reps and rotate
so you can see that hit off right there so she didn't get her hands over there's a nice block
right there so now we're working on blocking cross court
what is your expectation of your middle uh or this is just like like fastball outsides you're
not expecting a middle to arrive this is just like more kind of one one against one kind of
situations yes this no this is even um uh with the middle and but we know the middle is not
going to get there all the time especially if teams are going faster now so that's one of the
reasons we are blocking this way because as the faster teams go the more the set will dictate
where they're going to hit so it's hard a really fast set is really hard to move it around very
much the great hitters can do it but most hitters at our level the set's going to determine where
they hit so if i can see that set i know where that ball is going to be in the
of it and where if it's an inside or outside i know that the hitter will go with it so i just
shape my hands to what i see and now we're blocking on the other side here
so it's really giving them the responsibility or like the the not the responsibility giving
them the tools to like look you can for us it's fine that you can you reach to the ball
what do you see like if it's tied to the net it's your job to get your hands on the ball
don't be straight don't be get your hands on the ball and get the kill block
you know yes and the other thing matthias that so what happens is we don't want our players
drifting and flying out of bounds like a lot of guys do okay because if they fly they're going to
get tooled all the time so we want them to get out there and then if they have to adjust they
just with their hands and their arms as opposed to flying out there or flying back in and when
they're flying everything's moving and it's just not good so we want them to get out there to a
spot you can see the ball is going to be there and then we want them to get out there to a spot
the blue tape out there on the net they're going to get there and then they're going to shape from
there and you know we have tall enough athletes they can get there and they can take line or they
can take a sharp cross court it's also something i wanted to add this for sure also a personnel
kind of thing you know like if if you can have this dominance on the net then this is something
that you should invest time in for sure yes but if you watch you know we've watched a lot of
men international players like the uh i can't remember his name but he's a great player
but the polish outside is only like six feet tall micah the setter for usa you watch those guys i
mean they're not huge blockers but they're really good at getting their hands in the right spot
and that's kind of what we've studied and how this has evolved let me go there yeah this is
what we call a three ball drill we only do about 10 drills you're seeing this pretty much what we
do every day so so we could have a couple side out drills we do that we very often do but we
with scoring but this is this is pretty much our drill book so you know let's get set up here again
we're explaining here because like they're this middle right now she's new so this is all new to
her
okay so what we're doing here we're going to go live serve and then the guys right now
trying to hit in the block and then we're going to go what we call bowling ball
and we're going to transition back but we don't play it out and then here's a
second bowling ball coming over which we create an out of system so we go through this again
we're going to see a live serve game on okay then we're going to see a bowling ball and create a
situation the situation might be an overpass a perfect pass or they might move the ball over the
center and then the third ball will be an out of system so again we're not playing out so right
now this is a blocking drill the we're asked the guys right now you're trying to hit in the block
and so if our blockers do a good job they should block the ball if not our diggers
are getting a shot of it gets by we're working on reading right here there's an overpass that comes in
and you can't see it but we have big screens up on both sides of the screen and we're going to
the court that they can look up there and see the replay so that works really good so this all the
feedback right now pretty much is going to the blockers on what are you doing what are you seeing
are you disciplined are you seeing the right things are you making good moves are you getting
good touches are you getting stuffs yeah so right there's great feedback she got hit off her wrist
right there so she didn't get over and there's an out of system
play and we go three reps and rotate again we're trying to give reps we're trying to keep them
fresh and they got a chance to go off and see their their work uh when they rotate off when
they rotate off the court and get ready to come back in they got a chance to see it on the big
screen and then on on the side where the guys are hitting we can simulate anything we want uh
uh you know any patterns
we're going to see we can you know depend uh what other teams we're going to play we can just
simulate it so we're always changing what those guys are doing so you can see where jaylen just
went up and told the setter so we're going to work on something here whether it's maybe short
distance long distance maybe it's uh you know i see maybe he's going to two shoot the ball over
uh so we're gonna we're we're always changing this so they have to adjust
i can tell just watching this early in the year this is you know we're a little little ragged on
this it's just it takes a long time to become a good block and defensive team and work together
but they're getting a lot of great feedback here
