okay this is uh the first um official activity let's call it like that if you guys uh see my
practice plan for for today uh you will see we have uh individual warm-up and then we play a
small game which is something i do pretty much every day uh it's gonna be maybe four or five
minutes of stuff that stuff that everyone knows it's gonna be one on one two or two on two with
different rules uh inside 10 feet three meters or full cord it's just a few minutes to get people
a little bit fired up also you know after the the individual warm up and ready in in every way
ready for practice some people don't like that but not players but some coaches don't like having
these activities much but i like them so we're going to have that as the conclusion of the warm
up and then this is the real beginning of the practice and
that's feedback so what we will see in a few seconds we see pretty much 14 players
they are just going through certain motions without the ball this is really really important
because our movement needs to be timed and structured in a certain way
people are not just moving on the court so for whoever works at the junior level or
at non-professional levels uh you think that top top players they just go and because they're
just good at something but that's not totally correct and definitely for us uh learning to
become better players because we're developmental team basically we we are we play in a pro league
but uh we have players that need to become something and improve their their abilities
this structure is crucial so
understanding timings spacings rhythms so there's major differences between the pattern
which is just on the floor it's steps on the floor you can draw them okay that's a pattern
and then there's there is a rhythm so if i am a left side hitter i have my steps for my approach
but i could be waiting because the reception is high and then maybe the set is high and then
accelerating at the end or maybe i'm running all the way because i just
pass the ball and i have to go immediately to to attack without shuffling out and so on so the
pattern might be exactly the same but the rhythm is completely different and that applies to every
position so for example and in a second you can you can start to click if you watch on the camera
on the far side on the our left so position two you see this guy with a longer longer longer pants
on the other side of the net he's probably going through a side out motion
okay can we review that one this is called circle so he's basically following the serve
not waiting for the ball to come back but he's going right after the serve has gone by if he
waited for the ball to come back from the receiver to the center and that ball was flat or pushed away
from him he will be late so this type of movement that's called circle following the ball with your
eyes letting it go by but at the same time moving to get ready for the attack and you can see that
more and more at the high level done more or less instinctively that yes but we do that systematically
so uh you go back a couple seconds and we focus on uh the guy that's on our side right here in
position one uh with white shoes this is a setter uh so what we will see he's gonna
enter uh from zone one i hope that he's gonna start with his right foot and take a right left
right and then a hop and then according to what he visualizes as a reception uh then he might take
another shuffle or go directly to his movement to go set let's see what he does don't let me be down
right left right and a hope and another little hope because the pass is high and close to the net
so and now you might ask uh and you can stop you can pause pause again or actually go back a couple
seconds and let's watch uh the same guy we watched before the middle the middle hitter is on the left
side of his court so position four uh starting the guy with the long black pants okay let's see what
he does he's gonna start with his right foot and circle in the opposing position so he's going to a
gap or he's going to take a right foot and circle in the opposing position so he's going to a gap or
a ball or a seven or a shoot however you want to call it having had the serve cutting his route and
he's not going to wait for it to come back but he's circling and moving back to attack um so all
these things are so are they pretending to play what are they doing uh if you read my practice
plan it says football patterns and in brackets mental reps um mental reps is i think americans
will understand what that means
it's a type of visualization visualization where you're not just on your couch and thinking about
yourself playing you're actually visualizing on the court and moving accordingly so it's
something more powerful than just visualizing it's creating mindfully a structure of movement
but thinking about okay this is the ball and this is what the ball is making me do it's making me
wait and then like i said before and then speed up or it's making put me in a situation where i'm in
a hurry so if i was that same guy that middle attacker on the left of the court i will have
situations where the reception is flat and pushed towards zone two and we teach our middles to have
a pre-thought and think okay what can happen that puts me in trouble and what typically puts
middles in trouble is flat passes and that's a big problem and you literally lose the middle attack
but this is a normal situation you just have to be prepared for it so i need to think
if my receiver is fairly close to the three meter 10 foot line or if he is a passing overhead
that ball is probably not going to go up much after his pass so i need to know now that is
going to put me in a hurry very very likely so i need to step closer to three meters while this is
happening and be really ready to rush if that's what i'm gonna do in the in the system you know
if i'm moving towards the center i gotta go and you will see many many times middles being late
in those in those situations and potentially not even jumping so in another occasion what he will
do is visualize exactly that put himself in that situation where he's in a hurry and he needs to
run fairly far from his starting position and he's gonna do that uh what we saw the setter do is a
correct uh entry from from zone one also consider that referees uh at the top top level they allow
okay you can enter whenever you want so maybe that doesn't matter very much but when referees
don't allow you to do whatever you please even more your the number of steps you have is given
and he's limited so what we see very often is that and centers are still if they're thinking
that's where i gotta run to okay they're just running they're not stopping and they find
themselves in the counter movement in the moment of the past we really were very very uh precisely
that we always want to avoid that so this is what all these people are doing for their position
going through very precise or patterns and and hopefully less and less this is still september but
less and less will they look at their own feet and that is what i tell them
all the time when we start doing it okay the first five times you do something
look at your feet fine but after that i'm not attacking
watching my feet you know i'm probably looking at the set of course we don't have a set here
got to visualize that and that is absolutely crucial so um enough talking if you move forward
you you will see people uh passing and hitting or not passing and hitting which is a different
different pattern um you will even see defenders liberals are going to do that also
you see with the right shorts etc doing pretty much the same that the previous
uh guy did more circles on the other side i think people are going to review review stuff the guy
uh that is uh like left side hitter on on our side yeah a couple more seconds before he passes right
this yeah exactly exactly so what this guy is going to do let's see what he does and then let's
guess why he does that just before okay this is just before he enters so he's in a position as a
front row receiver
exactly why is he doing that because he's not receiving so the coach is watching this they go
back and watch all the right side left side attackers many times you will see them pass
and then run what this guy did right now he didn't pass he saw that the server was going somewhere
else so he has the time to shuffle which you hardly ever do if you actually receive the ball yourself
so he's not receiving the ball he's not receiving the ball he's not receiving the ball
unless the pass is very high uh or of course it's a bad reception so you have also the time to move
to the outside a little bit but what we see nowadays people want to stay close to the
sideline for good reasons if they play fast and so what the guy just did passing position
thinking of the situation okay the service is going over there as soon as i see that
i can take a three-step shuffle and then go into my approach so this is what we do for about five
minutes i think now you can just go uh with the next few seconds okay we're going to go to the
next drive we can see that the center in red stopping early taking a fourth step footwork
entry pattern right left right left which is crucial if you start with the left you will be
all messed up at the end i can guarantee you that so we're very precise at going right left right
left stopping left before the pass and then moving after that that makes a world of difference we can
see setters going through pivot motions uh that we're going to see in a minute when he gets flashed
here here is harry tax where did he go yeah sorry harry is not there right
i definitely think that that is that is where you were looking i really needed to go like that
right here okay great breaking打in there you just did one good run there you're going to fly out the
ball it's mine that i'm just glad you're trying to get your balls andré what that's a good
in a minute with the ball.
All this is five minutes
and maybe less than that.
Early in the season,
we did a little bit more.
Now we kind of know this stuff.
What we are not very great at
is applying everything,
but we're getting okay.
And this is just the foundation
of what we then do.
Maybe it's good to,
like we were talking before,
about before we were recording,
why football is important.
If you look at all the sports,
I think that was a very good comparison
between why do top volleyball players
do stuff differently from each other
and why do we see in other sports
that it's not really happening.
You made the point of American football.
I mean, if you watch American football,
if you watch basketball,
that's obvious.
Football patterns are clearly structured,
clearly codified,
and no one just takes some steps instinctively.
And that helps you play free, actually.
So it's not some sort of cage
where the player has to follow,
strictly follow certain things that he's told.
It's something that allows you to play it high level.
And if people from the United States
or people who follow football hear that,
I mean, it's totally obvious.
No football player or football coach
would ever be able to think about playing football
without having a clear,
clear football pattern.
And for some reason,
that became a habit in volleyball
that we just can't do something.
But that limits you.
The thing is,
we do not have the check for setting.
Okay?
And we do not have N'Gapet attacking.
Besides that,
most really good players,
they have very, very clearly,
simple and very clearly fine movements.
But anyway,
when you don't have that level of,
execution of talent,
you really rely on the structure of your movements
to solve lots of problems for you.
If you have the appropriate football pattern
for a certain situation,
that allows you to find solutions
that you didn't think you had.
So for us, it's very, very important.
I think for everyone, that's really important.
But maybe if you are a top performer,
there are some things you can get away with.
Or you might see differences
that we don't know the reason for,
but for what we can say,
that this is not an area
that's very much developed in volleyball
and everyone would have great benefits.
The fact that someone does something
that's very good instinctively
doesn't mean that
that same structure cannot be taught
or that we could have a better structure
that would make that player even better.
So my job is not to judge the top players,
but my job is to make my players better
and to give them things that they can use immediately
and that give them a very clear potential for improvement.
Let's not forget that if things are clear,
they are more easily repeatable.
If your setter moves towards the ball,
and granted he can set,
like he can set the volleyball,
that's the first thing.
Once you can set the volleyball,
if you move every time in a different way,
how can you be consistent?
You know, it's really, really difficult.
Whereas if you move in the same way
for a certain type of ball,
well, that makes it a lot easier
to perform consistently.
So our job is to find those best ways
and to teach them.
So what we're seeing now,
that's the next activity.
All hitters are going to
to do some pepper.
Ideally, I would not do pepper.
When I have two cords,
they will do it over the net,
which is a little bit better.
So you have some sort of
bumping the ball, controlling, setting,
and attacking without jump.
Here I do not have two cords,
so I decided not to set up cords
because of course it takes time to
then change the
everything for the main part of practice.
So they're just doing some pepper.
However,
what we will see in the background,
and there's some more people on our side,
not, let's say, not on camera,
they are really just doing shoulder warm-up.
We're not spiking the ball on the floor.
We're not throwing the ball.
We're not doing partner setting
and pumping the ball,
which makes no sense to me.
We are really just getting our foot on the board.
So it's controlled attacks,
maybe a few in a row.
Then switching,
and that's what they do with six minutes.
In this time,
the assistant coach is going to spin some balls to me.
I'm going to
basically pass them the way I want to pass them
and create a situation for the setter
and for the libero.
So, you know, zone five, you have the libero setting
and starting at the net,
you're going to have the setter setting.
If we are beginners at something,
I'm going to create the same situation
several times in a row.
That also,
applies to advanced players.
They can be beginners at a certain technique.
Like for example,
my two setters started from scratch,
people setting.
The first day,
I didn't do what I'm doing in this practice.
Now that they know how to do it,
and here we will see people setting by the setters.
So setting off on foot
and people setting by the liberals
when it's a good situation
and they can go with their hands.
We started with the same thing several times in a row.
And now that we're a little more advanced,
we will see complete variation.
So no two balls are going to be the same.
One time it's going to be a bump set.
One time it's going to be running to one side.
It's going to be all different.
So let's just watch what happens.
Background is a pepper for the attackers
and I'm going to pass ball to the setter,
right, left, right and pivot most.
One time setter, one time libero.
They're going to go five times each
and then flip with the other setter and the other libero.
Now he's going to the left.
So it's a different time.
Type of motion.
It's not the same.
They forget something, something similar.
Now, I might make him bump set the high ball
using an angle with his platform.
Libra is going to zone one and play.
So I'm mixing up a lot.
That's why I don't like to have
this type of activity with Libra of passing for setters.
I never do that.
I want to create situations.
First of all, liberals are working on their
paid is a nice footstep.
A five-step pattern by the setter on third ball,
left, right, left and short ball because of long distance,
like the high level shows.
We like mistakes.
Okay, so we're going to try to push the limits.
Hopefully we see a couple of those also.
Maybe this one.
There's going to be some time where we completely screw it up,
which is what we like.
You know, we try to push the limits and this is the activity where we
try to find those limits also.
So we have left foot pivots from zone five, mostly right foot pivots,
like you saw here from the net, unless we're moving to our left.
And we spend a few minutes doing that.
Yeah, I said I don't want Libra passing.
Oh, nice.
That's a nice mistake.
Okay, review it.
I put it deliberately.
The Libra tries to try the Libra tries to do something extraordinary.
And why not?
I mean, that's how you start.
I need to understand as a player.
Where is where can I do something?
Where can I not?
I think I can do that.
But first I need to do that a few times.
So those are mistakes.
Really welcome.
The question that I wanted to ask a bunch of people watching.
You also have the same question.
What is the what is the limit at which you want your Libra to pivot set or just do a normal set?
You know, is it on a running ball or is it like you just want them always to have this kind of
tempo or like what's your framework?
Okay.
Without going into a long discussion about setting and people setting and why people setting is
superior to let's say getting to the ball and jumping off the beat.
That is probably not.
The topic of this conversation.
But we could talk very long long about of that.
So the first thing we need to understand is that spinning like facing the ball and spinning
with it.
Is not a technique for top players that you do after we've done 20 other things and then
you get to that top echelon where you get to do that.
It's something that makes setting easier.
So I teach my middles.
I teach beginners to face the ball.
And spin with it.
So if I'm in position three and I am an under 14 player and I'm going to front set on both
side, I should totally face the ball and pivot on my right without jumping to set to zone
four.
If I have the ball coming from zone one, I'm going to set front set to zone two.
I'm going to face the ball and pivot on my left foot.
So instead of having as a first idea, I'm going to face that target.
I'm going to face zone four.
No matter what, no matter where the ball is coming from.
So now I find myself, you just see this screen, like basically screenshot that we have right
here.
Imagine you are the setter at the net and your ball is coming from where I'm holding it.
And you, your only idea is I'm going to face zone four because that's what I've been told to do.
But the ball is coming from the other side.
There is a massive angle between the origin of the ball and your position, so to speak.
So the question is when?
Are you finding yourself facing zone four?
Arguably before the ball reaches your hands.
So you're going to fall because you're going to make sure that you do what you're told.
So you're going to turn, set your left foot on the floor.
So rotate the left side of your body.
So you're facing zone four.
The small problem is that the ball is still back there and we will see middles, everyone who played
middle blocker and you did, knows that situation.
Where you, the ball is off the net a couple of meters and you're taking crab steps from the net already
facing zone four with the ball behind you.
Okay.
How many middles we see doing that?
So the thing is really, it makes your life a lot easier to face the ball and spin with it.
Okay.
So that's a starting point.
So liberals do that because it's easier, not because it's an advanced technique.
If we're talking about playing fast, that depends, we will find that limit and it's a,
a connection between the liberals himself and the attack.
We, I don't know when or where this limit is.
It depends on who sets and mostly on who attacks because setting is easier, you know?
So that we will see, we see what we want to do.
The number one thing is having the ability to make a move.
And the other thing is saying when and how fast we want to play.
But people setting itself and don't think about jumping, just the fact of facing the ball and
spinning with it is just a way to make things a lot easier for people.
So liberals, if they are in five, they're going to mostly people left, you know, because
they're pivoting towards zone four.
At the more advanced level, they're moving.
They could front set to zone two and still last at the last moment, spin and set to zone
four.
So that will keep the middle blocker from the other side, even if it's a liberal setting.
Really, you know, that setter off the net.
What we really don't like is to just have, okay, setter takes the ball, even if it's in a good
situation, three and a half meters, it's 12 feet off the net.
We could play fairly fast.
We could play both sides and we had the liberal coming and setting with his arms and setting
and moon ball.
I don't like that.
And I think we can play faster than that.
But as to the limits of playing fast, that depends.
It really depends on the level we try to make that area bigger.
It's a management of efficiency, not only what we would like to do, but also what our
opponent likes.
So it's not just for the sake of being spectacular.
It has to be efficient.
So we're going to find those limits, but it goes through errors and to literally, you
know, completely destroying, destroying a volleyball.
And this is in every learning process.
So this is.
Thank you.
You had seen this drill a month earlier.
You would have seen a lot more bad stuff and that's part of it.
So we do that for exactly six minutes time for the heaters to get their
folders warm and and these guys.
So I was saying that I don't like a liberal passing for setters because when you go with
if you go with easy balls, it's going to be always perfect pass.
And if you go with Tupper balls, okay, it's going to be beat of everything.
But who knows?
What I want to decide what type of ball we're going for.
I mean, it's going to be tight.
It's going to be over here.
It's going to be a pump set, whatever.
So and at the same time, we get liberals passing reps.
We have only two people, me and my assistant coach.
So that's the drill I prefer to do.
If I have, if you have more people, you can do it better on two sides of the net.
And you're just taking the extra workout.
Also, you know, let's be honest.
Yeah, I work out enough anyway.
And this.
The next thing will be.
A certain fast warm up.
I like to do that for two sets of a couple minutes where we have basically.
All the receivers are receiving or taking turns.
But if it's liberals, they're always passing.
If it's, you know, outside hitters, they are receiving a few and serving a few.
That's why we do two series of two minutes.
And of course, the middles, they're just serving and the setters, they are just serve.
Why is it called serve and pass warm up?
We can, you can run it.
It's basically controlled serves.
Controlled serves.
Here we have lines.
So it's two at a time or there is just one because we have one receivers.
It's, it's just getting your shoulder warm, your toss, right?
And receivers getting some easier balls to start with a service.
Don't always understand that.
They start blasting.
But we do that before really serving game serves and receiving game serves.
I think this is good for prevention, like for health and for quality also.
So this serve went to six and we shouldn't pass that one because we have receivers in one and five.
I like receivers before they are really hit by Rockets to have a few easier balls to.
You know, to get there because that's practice.
Okay.
It's not, it's not a game.
So our level of adrenaline and activation is not at the top and that's normal.
So I like to do that for multiple reasons.
It's literally two plus two minutes.
It gets really smooth because players have a couple of times that perfectly know how to run the drill and, and it's done.
And so we, we move to this one, which requires a little more explanation.
This we call serve and pass battle.
It looks like.
Normal serve and pass.
And it is, uh, well, large extent, there is a score that I can explain in a second.
I, we do that with, with score and without score, the structure of the work is exactly the same.
So we're going to have two receivers or two receivers at the time.
Uh, I can't see that here.
We might have, we will see in a second.
Anyway, you're going to have two couples was here.
Yeah.
I mean, we, yeah, I don't know if there is a guy that, yes, exactly.
So on.
Our side, we see, we see three receivers.
There's two on the court in five and six and the one with the white knee pads is a receiver as well.
So there's three of them, two of which are actually passing.
Uh, I don't like to have three at a time, uh, for many reasons.
One that you never control, um, how many reps you get exactly.
I prefer to have two where who passes then rotates out and the other person comes in.
I also like servers to have a very clear scene.
They're going for, I don't want to have balls going to six because they just serve somewhere.
So we're either five, six or we are, we are one six and we can have a balanced number of repetitions also.
So that's the first thing to consider.
We would, let's, let's talk about pairs because there's a pair on the court, free passing.
Um, of course they are inside six or one six.
We, I mean, I like to have them move from one side to the other very often.
And probably here, we don't see them move, move as often as they should because they tend to forget.
Um, I really want servers to serve once maximum twice to the same scene.
So if I have these guys in five, six and on the other side, I have three servers.
I would want those servers to serve one time to the five, six scene.
Once the first server is going again, these people on this side, they should both to one six.
Why?
Why is that?
Well, because we know that the more, as soon as we have a basic ability in a skill, we said that before for setting as soon as we can kind of serve.
Okay.
And we can kind of pass and kind of set the more we create variation, the more beneficial it is because it makes it closer to the randomness of the game.
Not nearly as close, but it's much better than standing in five and receiving five for five minutes and serving to five.
Five.
Six for five minutes.
So we like to have that variation a lot.
Okay.
So we tell people same server again, move over here.
Okay.
It's just two servers.
It's not enough, you know, because you would be moving all the time.
So with, we try to find a sweet spot.
Okay.
But when we have three or four, even four servers with four servers, for sure, one serve each, and then the receivers are going to move, move on the other side, side of the, of their court.
Um, also.
Servers are encouraged to serve from every position because that's something you can see a lot.
There is middles.
They, they think they need a visa to serve from zone one.
Uh, where is that?
What time zone is that in?
Like they don't know anything else.
Uh, people serve from one.
They don't know where zone five is.
You know, that's bad for multiple reasons.
I understand that you will have your number one serving zone, but why should you not be able to have it pretty good serve from the other side as well?
And that's fantastic.
The reasons can be very valuable.
So for both tactics and also that same variation that enhances learning and performance, we like people to move at the service line as well.
So that is basically the structure of the drill.
We will have, um, um, what liberals are going to be receivers.
Of course, outside hitters are going to spend half of their time receiving half of their time serving.
Setters are going to do the same.
So for example,
here we see on the far side of, uh, of the net, we have a setter at the net and we don't see him right now because it's, uh, on our side.
Uh, the other guy with the red shorts is the other setter and they will flip whenever this series is over.
Uh, middle of us are going to spend some time setting.
I have four middles on my team.
Locky leaks.
I always like to have four and there's always choose me.
The, the, the other center is they are catching right now.
Because on this side of the net, uh, you're going to catch and then go to serve.
So always, uh, who is setting has a target, uh, which is not me, uh, because I need to, well, right here, I need to score mostly without being crucified.
Uh, but if I'm not scoring, I'm watching.
Okay.
So I don't want to catch those.
So what we're going to have on this side is we have four servers.
One is catching the ball set by the middle blocker, and then we're rotating because otherwise we're just waiting anyway.
Um, and.
And at half time setters will flip and the receivers will flip with the other receivers who had been serving, uh, the middle of who is setting at the net.
You will see him always back setting.
Why?
Well, because it's a baby drill for a professional to just, well, I'm just going to be here and just going to set.
If you're there, at least we're either back setting or your people setting either, or if you are a setter, you're going to tell your catcher, which
in this case is the assistant coach with the black tracksuit over there on the other side.
You're going to tell your, um, catcher where he's going to stand.
So you're going to put him on the left and set the two balls there.
You're going to put him on the right and set the two balls there.
Uh, I think I said everything as to the structure.
So if you want to have it run, I'm going to talk about the score for a second.
Sometimes we do it for time.
That would be my question.
So great.
Uh, sometimes we do it for time.
Which has some advantages.
Okay.
This was an attempt to a back set.
Let's see if there is an error.
Once there is a serving mistake.
So pause for a moment.
I know I'm being, when I, when I do coach clinics, uh, it takes 30 minutes to explain how I do serve and pass.
So you see this tall guy in six behind the court.
Okay.
Right behind the waiting receiver.
What is he doing?
So he is one of the servers.
Why is he there?
He is the backup server.
So when we miss a serve, we're going to have a backup serve a little more conservative.
It's a standing float.
We don't waste time, but we do give the receivers a rep.
And we mostly do that.
Even if there is a score, it doesn't count for the score, but we still do it.
So he's there.
Cause if the server misses, he's ready close to the service line foam serving, and then he's going to go serve his own server.
Uh, after that, okay, we can, we will see at some point, we'll see a me serve and we'll see a backup serve.
Now someone forgot to be targets.
And so just for the sake of me looking bad.
So now some, there's someone, um, this stuff happens to, um, when we score, I like, uh, what I like the most, uh, is going in a row.
Uh, that is what creates the most.
Competition.
So I don't really do okay.
You have to do these out of six out of 10, stuff like that.
You know, I like to have the same, really the same battle people going for the same thing.
And it's either one or the other.
Um, and losing everything whenever the other part achieves, uh, their, their good cervical reception.
So that means what we mostly do here is a four versus three.
So receivers.
Need for the big point.
So to be, to have four good passes in a row.
So perfect or positive in the data volley, uh, or in the scouting coding, uh, double plus or plus that gives a point to the receivers.
And if it's not that it's less than that, it's the point for the servers.
Uh, plus the servers have for every big point when it starts over, they have one bonus for server error.
And after that.
Their serve error is a point for the receiver.
So we can start good reception one and not a good reception.
Two for receivers, good serve one for sure.
So it's always, it's a back and forth where one side is counting and the other side side lost everything until either the receivers get four in a row or the servers get three in a row.
And that is one big point until the time because we don't that we don't do that for an easy time because we need to play volleyball.
So we don't have a lot of time.
I have to do that.
So maybe we do this for six minutes and after six minutes was the most points.
So, uh, or maybe it's a time still finished to break the time, but that's about what, um, last thing maybe about the structure of the drill.
We, um, we will have the receivers pairs switch at halftime so that in one serious, they're going to be receiving serves.
From both sides, which means from every, every server.
So if we have a six minute serious with or without score after three minutes, the receivers pairs or groups are going to flip and the servers are staying.
There is more to say, like we have ways to give the outside hitters more reps because they are serving only half time.
Uh, so half the time.
So we try to make their servers, uh, groups on each side of the, of the court.
I'm even to have the outside hitters always in a smaller group than on the other side.
So we obviously three and four, we could even see three and five.
That's not a mistake.
It's because these guys need more repetitions.
Um, and so we try to, to give them a little bit, a little bit more like, like that.
I think I said the most important things about, about the drill.
Yeah.
And we also saw some nice examples of.
What happens when there is an error second serving.
So yeah, it's not, it's not a perfect solution.
Sometimes we do it.
Sometimes we won't, we always use a backup server if we're not boring.
When there is a score, sometimes we will, sometimes we won't because it kind of interrupts the flow of the game a little and gives overall less game reps.
Uh, so we will, yeah, we will use it sometimes.
And not.
We'll use it some, some other times.
So anyway, that is the, the server pass activity.
What I still wanted to say is that basically this practice, this series of, of clips of one practice, that will be my most typical practice.
So if I had like one practice plan that I could never change, that would be pretty much it.
We would have some setting tutoring.
We would have, uh, some server pass and we would have these that we're going to see now.
And we're going to have.
Score six or six course practice.
Not always like that, but it's mostly some, something like that.
It's very close to the typical practice.
And what we do like these drills, uh, these activities are what we do by far the most, what we're seeing here.
That's another practice, but we're, um, we, we have this clip, uh, just to show a couple trick plays.
That is what we happen to be.
Try.
Trying to do later in the attack and attack.
So just take these as a background of what we're about to see where you can just run it.
It's just a couple balls.
So it's basically an easy free ball going to the liberal whereby the liberal is setting directly to a heater who can then attack it.
Like it's going to happen here or set to the middle that is going with him.
So what we see now is.
Exactly.
Yeah.
I was like reading around that just to the middle because it's something that went by pretty fast.
Right?
Yeah.
Okay.
So it's three, four sets.
Exactly.
So the liberal is instead of passing to the set or she could do, he is setting directly to the left side.
He can either attack directly after the serving pass.
We're going to do a bit of three on three back roll.
Um, we never.
Do hitting lines.
We never attack without the block.
We might do that in the first couple weeks when we see how the sets are and we install all our plays.
So we're going to do a little.
But after that, it's all works.
We're going to always attack with a block.
Uh, what we do, what I really like to do for multiple reasons is to do four or five minutes of three on three back row.
We'll do that as an attack warm up.
It's controlled.
The goal is not to score.
The goal is to keep the teams that are off the court off the court.
That's the goal.
We never achieve that goal.
The goal would be to make the drill.
And that I have to change, but it never happens because we have, it's really difficult to get to 10 in a row.
Believe it or not.
No, we would want to have 10 net process.
And when we really get that, then you say score and then they kill it, you know, and then the next, the next groups come in.
Um, I like it.
It's for multiple reasons.
Controlled three on three back.
One, it's good.
Warm up for fighting.
Okay.
First, second, uh, it's back row.
So you land on both feet when you hit the back row ball control, you land on both feet.
So it's good for your, you know, knees and back not to have the first attacks already completely off balance as it happens when you leave all the, you know, people are going to land on one full period.
It's just functional.
The torque that you need to fight.
So we do a few of healthy, healthy balls.
We play a little bit of defense on controlled balls that people are not very good at.
I can guarantee you.
And then people get frustrated because it was an easy ball and we messed it up.
So a few minutes of practice doesn't hurt.
We're going to rotate the role positions.
So there is no middle, opposite setters, anything, you know, everyone, five, one, six, and every time you rotate.
You chase those position, same idea, understanding that zone one, you don't need your passport to go there, but you could find yourself there and still play volleyball.
So just a little bit of general, general ability to play the game, uh, specific ability to control a placed ball.
It's a complete different thing than hitting hard.
So all of a sudden I find myself three and a half meters off the net.
I want to place the ball to the center over there in zone one.
I can't do it.
Okay.
So every now and then you find yourself in a situation where you want to control the bone.
That's not the same skill, uh, middles might find themselves on the court and play and doing that.
And it can't do it.
Um, and, um, keeping those balls off the net, we might have somebody at the net or we may not, depending on how many people we have.
But anyways, we want to, we're in the defensive position, uh, and situation.
So if I am in five.
I have my setter in one, you know, I can shoot this ball to the net because we can't set, you know, we can't transition.
So it's just for many reasons.
I like to have these two minutes of three on three reasons why I don't like to hitting lines, not specific, no block.
It's just showing off.
You know, it makes no sense to me.
Once we know how to attack, once we know how the trajectories of our sets are, we forget about that almost completely.
And then we just work with, with the block.
Um, and the other reason is all these things I said, you know, control, um, even, even mental steadiness, because for certain teams, it literally becomes a seasonal project to go 10 in a row.
Professional teams, believe it or not, I'm getting they not Italy, but believe it or not, I've had plenty of teams.
They would literally melt.
Like they could not stand the pressure of going 10 times in a row, placing the ball.
It was the most stressful part.
You practice, maybe it's me, but, uh, it's one of my little, little things that I really want to, to get done at.
It needs to be, to be done.
So for all these reasons, we run four, four minutes of, uh, it's not four minutes because it's four.
It's just because we probably flipped the center from the net to the back court.
After a couple of minutes, everyone is warm.
And then we play ball after the, uh, three on three, we oftentimes we're going to play with score.
Like we will see.
In, in a few minutes, what we're seeing here is what I call at work six on six.
So it's a portion of six or six.
That's going to be typically 15, 20 minutes where we don't have a score.
We call it attack work because we're creating specific situations of attack predetermined attack.
And then as a concept was we would play ball.
So what we'll have here is a sequence.
Where I think it's four balls, uh, the first and the third are going to be middle middle has to attack.
And on the other side, it's going to be one on one commit block, but the ball goes to the middle.
And then the second and fourth ball are going to be pins.
So four and two or four and one, if the center is, is front row.
Um, of course it's getting middle attackers.
Clear repetitions.
Later when there is a score and the ball, the game is normal.
Of course the middle attack.
Yes.
Okay.
So that's why for four, they have more repetitions in this drill.
So there are balls that are going to be middle.
Um, then we still have the two pins.
We don't know where we're going to set, but I want the middle to be beating and moving because we need to get better at that, uh, for four.
And then we play ball.
So let's say four balls we have here.
Our system coach is putting a controlled serve.
Okay.
We're going to have four balls in that direction and then four ball four balls in, uh, in this direction coming, coming towards us.
Um, we will see here two things.
One is right now we can see you.
If you get, you can run it.
The center is front row and we will see the middle running slide attack and scoring with a tip, which basically leads me to my utmost joy.
Uh, we do run slides.
Okay.
We, and you can pull it for a second because then we go to the, just go back to a couple of seconds right after the kill, so to speak.
So I explained what we do when there is kill.
We will see here middle front row, excuse me, set the front row, go back for a couple of seconds.
Just, uh, when, when there is the kill of the middle, the middle blocker on the slide, so this is going to be this tip.
Well, that's fine.
Perfect.
Okay.
So we have a slide pattern, uh, one on one.
So position four blocker, uh, we can have a long story on why the tip, the dunk, that stuff is the number one solution on that play.
Not interesting right now, probably.
Okay.
But I do want to have a series of options.
One of which is the slide.
There's no reason to me why, you know, any fourth division wins team can run that and the men's team can't do that.
Also, it, it takes a lot.
It's a lot of load off the opposite.
At, at the, at a good level, but not the super top level.
You see a lot of blocking on almost half of the next.
So when the center is front row, the position four blocker is attached to the middle blocker.
They just leave the opposite out, you know, and people can score.
It's tough to score with the middle.
It's tough to score with the opposite.
And that's why people do it.
They don't do it because they're crazy.
They do it because they're right.
They block, you know, 55% of the net.
And then it's hard.
To run a pipe.
How can you run from position six?
If you have a second blocker that's already there, you only have one direction.
What?
Okay.
Um, yeah, I want to break that, you know, so I want to have middle running slides.
I want to have middle running a slide, uh, in transition, easy transitions where a tip or a touch ball by the blocks, uh, takes the opposite out of the offense.
You can be the best off.
So what I just said before, if you have Kurek as your opposite, you're going to have position.
Four blockers having to take care of him.
Okay.
But even if you have Kurek or even if you have, you know, uh, uh, the best sites ever, the best opposites in the world, if they fall, they can't attack.
So if I tip him to the, to the floor, then I don't have him.
And you can't tell me, yeah, well, then you have six running because there is no time and there is nowhere to land because if there is sites have on the floor, where is positions, the position six guy running and no one does.
Who does that?
No one runs position six to one in those situations, but it's an easy ball though.
Easy ball.
The only problem is we lost one side of the net.
Middle has appropriate footwork runs behind the center of one foot.
Easy to do.
Once we find it, it's something that people should learn how to do when maybe we will never learn it, but we're going to try until the last day of the season to run that play.
And we don't need to run it very often.
I just need to.
Have a blocker out there when I have him.
I'm happy because the sector can turn and dunk the ball down.
Having not having position for bugging him.
Pipe can be set against one blocker.
You know, do whatever you want.
You want to follow my slide?
All of my slide.
We're never going to score.
Fantastic.
Okay, so I want that play in.
So that's what we're doing here.
Then in general, whatever we're running, I set the front row, set the back or whatever in this.
Type of attack war 99% of the time.
If there is a first bowl side out kill.
So if the ball go down first attempt, we're going to have what we call an extended play.
So we put the ball in and we have to play.
So in this case, and we will see that in the second extended play is like an over deep that goes to the side.
That's just a tad and it's going to be an easy ball.
Then that's why I showed the clip for that is going to be a trick play.
So you can just run it.
Now the middle is scoring first ball side out.
Kill.
Good.
Okay.
And now comes a just safety.
Of course, fall out of the way.
And then we get easy ball trick play.
We might make it.
We don't make it.
Whatever happens.
No problem.
But we we practice.
Okay.
This is the moment to make mistakes.
It's the moment to try things.
So the next ball would be not for the middle four or two.
And then we play volleyball.
If you play.
Volleyball.
There is no second.
No second ball.
So on the second ball, we the middle say jumps.
See, that's again, that is different people.
First ball slide kill.
Okay.
Trick play, but you can do whatever you want.
So you can set directly.
You can give it to the center and then we'll figure out what the four does because he has to be ready for the direct set by the liberal and then attack.
Normally, if the ball goes to the center, you can't tell them.
You got to have them do it and find out how to do.
And this is the second ball, four and two or four and one in this case.
And then we, well, that was not the legendary rally, but we played the rest.
Okay.
So we're going to do 15, 20 minutes of that with some pretty to one.
One day we'll have people and then high ball against triple walk.
Like you have all sorts of things that we want to practice, by the way.
To anticipate the question I know you would ask is we never repeat hardly ever repeat anything.
Hardly ever.
If we're going to repeat something and that's going to be really exceptional.
It's going to be in that drill, but rarely because it's too easy.
Um, I, I question that very strongly.
You know, we're going to learn how to do something.
Or if you're not able to run a slide that you don't see what your six or six first.
We have the basic ability to run.
slide or to do whatever you want to do if it doesn't work it doesn't work we're going to go
the next time why it's too easy for a high level player okay now we are going to do this that you
just missed that's too easy but the other thing is also why do you want to do it so you are the
middle attack where you go you don't connect you don't score can i repeat one it's normal you need
to just you know keep calm and keep playing and the point is not that now you've got a score
because then the blocker would say can i block again no i'm going until you have satisfied your
ego and you're at you're happy because you just did what you want but that's not how the game
works so it's way too easy it's for me it's methodologically incorrect uh it's not about
the flow of the practice and so on it's just that i don't like the nature of repeating things
just because it's
too easy it's too predictable now i know what we're gonna do of course when we learn how to
synchronize on the triple block we're gonna go now we do triple block high ball and then we make
movement yes but once we've done that three times in three practices for five minutes that we know
how to do it and the problem is doing it live and that's the same for all those situations
we meet the high ball set non-setter misses a set can i repeat no
of course
you can't because every advanced player can set the ball the problem is i did in japan you can
imagine in japan you know if people couldn't set the ball but we messed up sets in 606 or in games
and not because people couldn't set run a drill they said 150 times in a row correct the problem
is that one so understanding this and and players are still sometime well they understand it fairly
fast but many kind of come with the idea that they would need to be fed some
repetition it would be a little bit more example of kind of a repetition that fixes everything it
does not fix anything it just gives you an incorrect feeling of mastery that you don't have
the problem is not in this in that one execution the problem is executing in a context so realizing
and executing something that you know how to do but it's that it's the context that makes it
difficult so this is this is why we never hardly ever repeat anything for sure done
was going to ask just to be very clear people ask all all coaches ask sometimes presidents ask
i see well for me what i've always seen is people repeating after mistakes but i'm gonna go yeah
but that's another century now my man if you repeat and then you miss again like i got blocked
and i want to do you know how to do it if you don't then it's either too difficult for you
you tried something you shouldn't try or we should tutor it okay i need to learn how to keep high
hand good we can work on that in a drill but it's not six or six it's not the moment to do that um
and then we come to the final part of the practice which is actually a big time wise it's a big chunk
of of the practice so this practice is a typical practice two and a half hours
from start to finish okay and in two and a half hours i i try to give the scored six on six a good
hour 15 minutes something like that
probably often even more i will skip sometimes the attack work and go directly to the scored part
and uh so we really like to have like four times a week uh an hour 15 an hour 30 of six on six
when i say scored six on six this is one the main example what i do the most
but before i go into the score um talking about score the main concept
is uh that when we do six or six with the score we are gonna serve okay we're gonna serve only
every rally is gonna begin with a serve um this is i'm very big on this one and i
i'm happy to see that in recent years a couple very important uh coaches uh have embraced that
idea certainly not from me although i'm good friends with one of them uh so if you ask
for a
example, I can name some people. If you ask
Lorenzetti, and if you ask
Francesco Petrella, who is the
new coach of Modern Mouth, of course, in the last
several years, they work together. So,
if you ask them how many serves
they had per practice
in 6-on-6,
they will tell you numbers that
will make you stare like
that. So, I reach
on normal
days
120 serves
only in 6-on-6.
I got up to
almost 200. But on normal
days, it's going to be 120 serves.
Those are the only ones that count.
I don't, in both senses of the
word, count. I literally do not count
other serves, plus
they count more because they're specific.
I want to run my side out from
a serve. I want to run
my break point from a serve.
We need to solve problems.
So, to steal Lorenzetti is very
I think
a very
effective way of
calling it. If you just put
balls in, it's
like drugged practice.
It's the same. Okay, y'all
feel good, guys. Give a rhythm.
The ball is up in the air. We
do stuff. Whereas
6-on-6, just with serves, that's
man. Then you
really, that's train ugly.
And those people who don't know train ugly,
just Google train ugly and you will find
a lot of stuff. Don't train for the
immediate feeling of
success, of things
working. You know, work
to solve problems. And then suddenly
in the game, you have the problem. And why?
Because you've got to receive. The pass
serves. So people don't have
enough receptions
in the live situations.
And that's
a problem. Okay, I want them to receive a lot
of balls, but I want them to receive balls in
real situations. So those numbers are never
enough. Just count your numbers.
And even if you don't have a
statistician, just film
one practice where you run your
most typical practice. Don't change anything.
Film the 6-on-6.
Count how many receptions
every receiver has. You
will cry. It will never
be enough to achieve mastering.
So that's why you need a lot
more. If I have 120 serves,
I would have serve errors
also. But if I
had 120 serves in
and I have 6 receivers,
I have 4 outside hitters,
and 2 liberals, I'm going to give an average of
20 each. And we're going to
also be mindful of
spreading the repetitions among
everybody. That's a number.
20 live repetitions
of something, that's practice.
If I have 4, what
are you getting better at? You're getting better
at hoping to become a receiver
in my mind.
So this is what we're going
to see here. It's not always
like that, but most of the
time we'll really just have
serves. And every now and then
we'll have a ratio of maybe 2
serves and 1 extra
ball. And that's going to be rare.
So probably
in the season, 90%
of all the 6-on-6 with score
activities
are going to be
initiated. 90% of all the rallies
are going to be initiated by
a serve. And that
for me is
super important.
So
we'll see that here
as this score,
this particular score, and we'll see that
in a second. It's called Opposite Volleyball.
What I like is the idea
of going in a row. I don't
like, of course I do that also,
but mini games
and you win one, you win one,
fine. Then I win one,
fine too. We play
8 of them.
I mean, it's not very competitive.
This one gets competitive because
we can play for 40, 50,
60, 75
minutes. We most, oftentimes
we have to break the tie at the end
because we are running out of
gym time. It's 10pm
and then we go, okay, 23, 23,
normal volleyball, finish it.
Because being in a row
makes it infinite.
You need to reach
six side outs in a row.
It's doable, but extremely
difficult. If it's something that ends
in 12 minutes average, that's not
good. The ideal is,
that it's really, really, really difficult
but achievable.
So let's see.
Just, I can
live comment what happens.
The scoring, the team that's
scoring is only one at a time,
so it's the far one.
They have to get to six. They are in P4,
setter in four. Let's see
if they side out.
They side out. One.
Okay, they got one.
So they
rotate. They go to P.
Oh, that was P4, setter in four.
Now it's setter in three.
And these teams here does not
move, the team on our side.
Different server, though. We have one side out.
Serve
from
kill. Two side outs.
The team on our side stays
different server. The team over
there rotates.
So it's going to be P2, different
middle coming in, and so on.
So they side out. It's opposite
volleyball. If you side out, you side out again.
Okay, and you want to get six.
How many do we have? Three? Let's say
three.
Serve. The hitter gets blocked.
Okay, done. Zero.
They lost everything.
So what happens now,
I can pause for a moment.
That's the only little special thing.
What would happen is, okay, now it's
these teams
on camera side, close side.
These teams turn to start
counting. They will. In a second,
they will become the side out team.
For that, there is the special serve.
So when we score a
break point, so we stop
the series of side outs on the other side,
we have a special serve. That's the
only time when the same server goes
again. And that's
an opportunity for this team
to score with another
break point, already their first
side out for the series that's
about to begin. If they
don't score, nothing happens. They start
siding out. If they do score, they
start with one. So let's see if they do it.
You can see that was actually
it was a touch. Okay,
so they did not. So we start
from zero. Over
there, so this
team here is in the rotation where they've
always been. Okay, and now
they start rotating, hopefully. And over
there, now they are stuck where they
ended in that set or two rotation.
Okay, and now they are stuck where they ended in that set or two rotation.
Okay, and now they are stuck where they ended in that set or two rotation. So now we're at zero.
So now we're at zero.
So now we're at zero. Nice. Pivot motion.
Nice. Pivot motion.
Nice. Pivot motion.
And whatever happens,
happens. We go to one or they
score a break. Okay, we
did side out, no time. But which
actually is nice to pause here.
That's the second part
of the message about this game.
What just happened?
The far team scored
three. Could have been four. Could have
been five. Okay, now they got
stuck. And we, on
this side here, we start counting.
Zero. Like we got
stopped immediately. So it's special serve
on the other side. What's the difference
between those two teams at the end of the day?
There is none.
So talking in extremes,
that team over there
could go every time three, four, five
in a row. Four, five in a row
every single time and then get stopped.
This team over here could go every
time zero or one.
Okay, and I
hope like
an important statement here.
We can, if we need to,
it's called the medical
joker rotation. We don't
want people to be stuck for hours.
Okay, so when we are
stuck for too long, especially
for middle blockers, we're going to just
rotate because we need to rotate because
that doesn't matter. That does not
exist. In general, if we don't
side out, we're stuck there as long as we
don't side out. Or we can change that any
time. Okay, so we never
force people to
just suffer
for, you know, it's just
stupid. And that's why I like
to have four middles because having four middles
is ideal for this type of
games because you don't need to have an end.
If you end, very important.
I despise the idea
of the so-called Judas system.
So when middles betray their
team and they rotate,
they switch.
There is a game, team against team, but the
middles rotate. That is
something, if you see me ever do that,
come and arrest you because
there's someone pointing
a gun at my
face. Okay, it's not never going to happen.
If you have three middles, you
are going to have shorter games and
one team is going to have one middle and
one team is going to have two and the game
is going to be the game. Period.
End of the story. The exception
to that is when we have middles tournament
where we do rotate,
but because the middles have their own score
range, but that's really exceptional and it's
not going team against. There's two teams
plus the middles have their own
own tournament, so we score them individual.
But besides that, team
versus team, end of the story.
Period. So
forget about this rotation thing.
We
are playing an infinite
game. Playing an infinite game
makes it super competitive because
it matters. Even if you care
very little, it matters.
Stop.
After 57 minutes
and you get to five and you
lose everything, that
stings. So the pressure
is real. It's never a game,
but it's as close as it possibly
gets. More than playing 17
games of
2020 or whatever you do
where each individual game
doesn't really count or doesn't really matter for
anybody. That's one game.
The
general performance doesn't matter.
You still need to score
those six. So the team that wins
is not the best team.
It's the team that
does it one time
and stays alive and starts over.
So we'll push on that idea a lot
to stay in the moment, stay present.
You lose everything, you start over, which
is our game. We lose the
first set 25-10. We lost
one set. It's 0-0. We win it 25-10.
Same. There's no such thing as momentum.
There's no such thing as continuing.
Let's keep doing what we've been doing. It doesn't exist.
You're up to zero.
We start over. You're 2-0,
2-2, and the team that comes
back from 2-0
more often than not loses in the fifth.
Why? It happens
more often that the team that's up to zero
and goes 2-2, who wins the fifth set?
The team that goes up to zero, not
the team that comes back. That happens more often.
It's statistically significant.
Why? Well, because
coming back costs energy
and not playing so well,
that costs less energy. If you go
2-0 and go 2-2, you have a better chance.
Of course, anything can happen.
But you can't say, oh, well, we're just rolling
here. Let's just keep doing.
There is no such thing as to keep doing
anything. You need to start over.
The key ability is
regrouping and starting over
after having lost everything.
At the same time, this is a very strongly
drill.
It's a game with a strong mental
focus where you need
to start over as
part of the nature of the game,
of this game here.
And it's like
a vaccine. You become immune
to ups and
downs because it's just what you get
used to.
At the same time, I use this as
a message. It's a very
important
message related
to the mental aspect of the game.
These are the main
things. Oh, Cerberus.
Cerberus.
I like
to...
have some
Cerberus that are
covered by
bonus.
Not to repeat all the
misserves, which is
not good for many reasons. And then you have
rockets on the first
attempt and then easy balls on the second.
I like to have
something that also in that area
relates to the game. So I will
start timing
10 minutes. Every 10 minutes,
both teams have
a bonus of two Cerberus, which
would make in a normal set of
volleyball of a game, four
Cerberus per team. In a practice
environment, four errors, four
Cerberus per team is
pretty good because people have to hit
their first hard, hopefully,
you know, and then create problems for the side out.
So that's something I think is a
is a good number. And every 10
minutes, whether they had them or not, it
starts over. So every 10 minutes, bonuses
go to zero. You can miss
two Cerberus per team again.
And you just repeat those. Same Cerberus
repeats. From the third
Cerberus error on, in case that
happens, we will
replace the Cerberus with a free
ball, but it's the last ball contact.
So it's not like a coach's ball put in.
We're going to have a team that has to receive
the free ball just blocking. Okay.
Normal. Coach is in, like, setter's
position somewhere. Boom.
Bad set. Can't attack. Free ball.
And that's the last ball contact. So the team
has an opportunity to play. The team giving
the free ball has an opportunity to give the free
ball in a way that you're really trying to
still create a problem with that. And the team
getting the free ball doesn't get a boring and
non-existent coach's ball like we did before,
just for the trick play, just to install the
trick play. You know, that we would never do
in a normal. We would never just toss a ball
in. We only do that when we really want to
have a certain type of attack to practice that
attack. And we do that as little as possible.
But a good free ball is the last ball contact
where it's real and it's a real situation and
the coach can decide, okay, I'm going to give
the net, which is one thing. I can give it on
eight meters, which is a different system.
You know, so we are specific also in that.
And then we play. Maybe if I remember well,
if you just keep the restart the clip.
I just included, okay, they just played.
Yeah, this is whatever. Yeah, I'm just going to
make it let it play now. It's 14 seconds still.
Yeah, that was awesome. Yeah, give me a second.
It's yeah, no problem. This is the only use case
of the timer that I install, so I'm just enjoying
that right now.
Okay, boom. There you go.
Yeah, towards the end of the, of everything.
I like the end of the last clip.
You want me to go to the end of the last clip?
Towards the end. I think there's not much more
after the one that we commented after that.
So this is still 45 minutes left in the last clip.
45 seconds. Okay, fantastic. So if you go back a
few seconds and then we just let it go.
Because what I think happens here is exactly the server.
Yeah, that's fine. That's fine to start here.
At some point we will have a third server error.
And so this is what happens.
The team over there needs to be in blocking spots,
not just somewhere.
And then we will have the last ball contact where we screw
up the system. That's why I have it.
Sometimes we have better rallies.
That's not the goal. It's like that.
Anyway, we have all the volleyball and we screwed up the system.
So just to say that sometimes, not a million times,
but I will coach, I will interrupt.
I try to go individually and to not interrupt the flow.
But every now and then something needs to be said.
I will have my iPad mostly with me with the video delay.
And that was, if it's a big thing,
and back then it was still a big thing.
We cannot miss on a free ball system, you know.
And so every now and then I will stop, of course,
I try to do it as little as possible.
You can't every three minutes gather the whole team
and talk about something.
It's just say that even if we spend a lot of time scoring
and we don't want to interrupt, we don't want to repeat balls,
but we do want to coach.
So we have to have a way as coaches to communicate with the players.
Quickly, without big waste of time, I'm going to say something to somebody.
We know what we're talking about.
So we have our keywords.
We know we're not explaining anything.
So we have a small piece of coaching on things we know.
And maybe once, maybe twice in a practice, I will have to stop and say,
there is a big thing, okay, what we're not very good at.
And I say, okay, middles, real quick, sorry, guys.
I get the middles 15 seconds because there is something we need to see both back play volleyball.
Or maybe like here, everyone see this free ball, you know, what are we doing?
And then move out.
You can't do that too much, but every now and then, especially in the first part of the preseason,
you know, you got to do those things.
But again, it's rare, but it's done nevertheless.
The goal here on this day was six side outs.
In a row, which is the most for me, you have to see it and want to see at this level, you know,
I've suggested this drill to a lot of coaches, you know, you need to decide at your level,
what is a realistic goal.
So six might be too many for us.
It's really good because it's doable, but extremely difficult.
If it's something that ends in 12 minutes average, that's not good.
So it must be something, of course, you could go six side outs in a row after five minutes, but the
goal is that it's really, really, really difficult, but achievable.
So the most typical for me is six.
Sometimes it will go seven, whereby if you score a first ball side out, you get the bonus ball.
So that's a lot faster.
You know, there you reach your goal faster.
Anyway, when you reach six, the game is over.
Now, if I plan to go one hour, one hour, 15 minutes.
And after 20 minutes, I'm done.
25 minutes, one team wins.
Great.
Well, we're playing our game.
It's rare that we play more than two because, of course, it was like six games and we would fall into the same thing that I said before, that one doesn't really count.
So normally, we would normally have 1.2 games per practice, which means the majority of practices, that's one game that we mostly have to break where we have to break the tie, so to speak, or the undecided situation at the end.
So that's ideal.
And, you know, every once in a while, maybe once a week, someone wins before the end.
So it's really, really difficult.
The end is the set goal is that number of side outs that each team needs to accomplish.
So there's just one counting and the other one stopping that.
And then it changes whenever they stop them.
And so one team is counting and the first one that reaches the six in this case.
Six side outs in a row wins, wins, wins the game.
I tend not to just go, OK, one game and whenever it ends, I tend not to do that because we still have to train.
So if we need to do a good hour of six or six and it ends up to 20 minutes, well, that's not that's not good.
But again, if that happens, the second game is not going to end.
It's it would be very surprising if that if that happened, it would be the same goals.
Well, mostly mixed statistics.
Teams, this is maybe one thing that my conclusion would be really most of the time it's mixed teams.
We know we don't really practice starting six almost at all.
We will do a bit, but not not much.
And of course, if the level of the old team is very high and the starting six and the second six can really compete, then you could do that.
So I did that a bunch in Japan, for example.
But other than that, it would mostly be mixed teams.
And yeah, added everyone played with everyone a little manipulated.
Sometimes you want some players to be more with the starting setter, so you're going to do that.
But generally speaking, we try to lift the level of everybody and not have a team that plays against the weakest competition possible, which is what happens when you have starting six against non starters.
So we try to have it as even as balanced as possible and try to have everything.
Everyone, everyone will improve.
So I think in recent years, more and more coaches have sort of gotten away from the starting six versus second six idea.
But for sure, you know, from me, that that's a very important point.
We will do some of that, but most of the time it's going to be mixed teams.
