This is the one where, again, there's two scoreboards on each side,
and they're kind of basically competing against,
trying to earn 17 points before they give up eight.
And there will be times, too, where, you know,
we will play another six-on-six game until they earn 17 before they get eight.
You know, so just kind of putting that
and forcing them to prioritize that balance.
As a coach, it's tough, right?
Like, I don't want to be the coach that says,
oh, you can't miss here, you can't make service errors.
It's a tough thing, right?
A lot of the skills in volleyball, you've got to serve tough,
but you can't miss.
You've got to be aggressive, but you can't make errors.
You know, it can be tough to find that balance,
and that's why I think drills like this are so important,
is to really help our guys find what it means to play with some balance.
The other part of this game, too, is that they'll realize,
like, if they're playing this game with the mindset of being afraid to make errors,
they're never going to earn 17 before they get eight if they do that.
You know, so it's...
It's trying to play smart, but also playing in a way
where you're thinking aggressively.
The simple thing that I preach to them is just,
I want you guys to be thinking about how you're going to score points.
I never want...
In an ideal world, I never want you guys to be playing with fear.
I don't want you to be afraid to make mistakes.
I don't want you playing, you know, afraid to serve a ball out of bounds.
It's just, you're not going to win games doing that.
You're not going to be at your best doing that.
You know, it's easier said than done with our sport,
but if we can put them in situations where they're going to learn,
that they're not going to be successful doing that,
on top of us telling them that as a coaching staff,
I think we'll be in better shape.
I think, in general, for every word that,
or every concept or key that I tell our guys,
I want to give them opportunities where they can learn
how to do it on their own, too, in practice.
