yeah this is yeah this is still the usa war but the guys are picking what they're going to do
okay yeah this is this is a nice one this is a nice one to yeah
for sure and then the nice part is like it's again the whole the whole point of it for me
is to again get them going get their energy blood up in and you know uh and they get they get to
choose what it is so if they don't if they don't accomplish what they want then it's uh they only
have themselves to blame right so um but i i also i'm a firm believer that uh the the more
autonomy you give the players the more intrinsic motivation you're going to develop within them
and that's you know i want our guys wanting to come practice every day i want them to be excited
and and look forward to coming in the gym every day and that's why a lot of these if not all of
them that's why they started playing the sport to begin with and it's a big reason why i give
our guys autonomy as much as i can
the extent is lost on this practice
as well he's on so he's on the floor side but i'll point him out here and you're in there
this is actually a a drunk sparad drill um that i learned while i was catching
the you know i was assistant to the unity for years and um this is where i i learned this drill
and so basically the the first the ball of the net has to go to right back and the center
is always right back so everybody rotates the
up the center uh the idea is to get the overall principle of the drill is to uh get non-center
setting reps from your actual back row position um and then on top of that working on you know
what our our offensive as a small offensive set location needs to be so getting those guys reps
will like for example as a coach i'll just be saying four feet 40 four feet inside two feet
off the net so i'll just say four or two higher lower constantly giving feedback on the location
so that they have a visual of what it should look like
um and then it's also a big part of it too is making sure that our guys are you know approaching
efficiently to ask some set especially if it's a non-center right we want it to be they start
on their approach the end of the approach being a direct line from point would be and you'll see
a lot of these it's not the case but uh we talk a lot about heel toe their first step in order
to slow yourself down so um where you'll see especially the middle blockers they'll start
on their little toe tail in their first two steps um so that's that's a lot of the primary
feedback that you get but they'll the goal of the drill through is just to to we'll say like
the goal is to get 15 in a rub in 15 minutes um but the feedback from our end is always the same
in terms of uh set location and then feet to ball maximizing control as a offensive attacker
um and then we do air correct on top of it so if a guy you know the set is off to end
in the rally or you know to end the uh the consecutive amount of uh swings then we'll again
start at the next one of the air corrects and that was a i mean that's something that's not
earth shattering but um that's a wl every time he comes in and talks with us every every semester
he'll always say aircraft aircraft aircraft give these guys opportunities to correct it so
that's something that's uh we've tried to incorporate more and more every year
i also like the thing you said about yeah not you mentioned more like tempo wise but
you're toting you know don't rush i immediately went into the like who is the most
new player in approaching them as an example for um players in the states that matt anderson is a
great example of being like having this acceleration into your approach you know
and then still making it look easy or making it look common yeah there's we are we'll do another
drill too that i we actually call it stampered setting i got from saw john dunning um explain
it where essentially you'll just you'll have a setter in the middle of the court setting the
ball to themselves on a random number of times and the attack is going to be a little bit more
aggressive than the other way around and then they're going to be set again um and then you
know you're going to have a setter on the back with a couple of different players and the attacker
doesn't know when they're going to be setting it so it just focuses forces them to really stay
patient if they start leaning forward you know they're just they're getting too antsy it's not
effective and um so that's something that we'll do we'll do like a six on six year old we'll
initiate that that way um then it's i get something i learned from from john that's uh
well as soon as i saw him like that's g it's a great secret idea you're trying to incorporate as
much as you can yeah sin of sin of stars right in front here um but yeah the the setter's doing every
So, yeah, the setter is digging every first ball.
If the setter doesn't dig the first ball,
then it doesn't count as one of these.
They stay where they're at.
So if they're at eight and the ball goes middle back over the net,
then they stay at eight.
We keep going.
So pretty simple drill.
There's ways you can modify it.
It's a good way to work on the Ingepett set.
You know, if the setter takes it, you can have them.
The only way you count as one is if the middle back is the one to set it
or hit it over the net.
If they hit it over the net, then everybody stays.
There's different ways you can do it and incorporate some creativity with it.
So this is when we're in the study table portion.
She's just working with liberos.
And I literally told her she can work on whatever she wants.
I mean, she's being an international libero for as long as she was,
playing as an outside, such a high level in Italy for so long,
and continuing to play pro.
She gets it.
The guys, I mean, those liberos get so much more work.
Because a lot of times in those drills before she got there,
they would just pass free balls and death bolts.
And now they're getting – they got a lot better because of her.
And they work hard.
She crushes them.
It's pretty fun.
This will probably – this section is probably about 20, 25 minutes is my guess.
So the court to the left is just doing quick pick work.
So our quick pick – it's going to be tough because you can't see it,
but I can send you the video from that court, I believe.
But the quick pick stuff, we're just working on – I'm huge on timing and spacing.
So in other words, what step are you on when the ball is?
Let's see.
Let's see.
And then how far away are you from the center?
Those two things have got to be consistent,
or else the setter is never going to be able to tell if it's a good setter or a bad set, right?
If you're not super, super consistent.
We really – we bring out the TV, as you can see in there,
so that they can get the visual themselves.
But I'm also really hard on the guys to give feedback.
If they're in line, give feedback to the guy in front of you
because if one guy is on the second step and the ball is on the setter's hand
and you're on your third, then you're going to give an inconsistent set.
The more consistent you guys all are, the better off you're going to be.
So we're really focused on just –
those two things that's something that i really try to get on our systems to prioritize is making
sure that again that the feedback i much rather have clear concise feedback one or two things
and making sure that's consistent throughout the drill so that we can ensure that the guys get
better at that one thing the box shifts through a first sample spike or like the first sample
simulation yeah this is just to be honest with you this is like i'm you're probably gonna notice i
don't i'm not even on the that court because well and the majority of the guys are on are split
between the rest of the courts but i also have that much trust in me and she's she's just very
very good as a coach and um this was actually like her first time really coaching this fall
with us and she was just she was really good with those liberos and it was uh
she was giving really clear feedback like i've asked um you know this time they're working
again getting soft and balanced um so that they can we always talk about maximizing range
um you know
If you're leaning one way, you can't – your range is cut in half
because you can't take a good step out the opposite direction.
And then independent arm digging, I think that's what they're working on here.
Three-ball wash, so it's going to be serve, two, four, eight is what we call it.
So, like, the ball will be passed – the libero will pass it to zone two,
zone four, zone eight, just to work on medium pass situations.
And then the third ball will be out of system.
And then the opposite side will receive those same three balls.
Let's go to the first action here.
I think this was the first day.
The setter on the far side, this was just the first day back.
So we were – but even then, the overall fall, we were working a lot on medium
pass out of system because of the setter situation.
So that was the overall objective for the day.
It was over – medium pass out of system setting.
So then when we get to the six-on-six aspect of it,
we wanted to get to the six-on-six aspect of it.
That's where we do the three-ball wash.
It had the component of two, four, eight out of system.
And it was actually when – one thing I got from – it's something crazy,
but when we were – when I was coaching the U21 team and we played Nikolov,
like I was telling you earlier, we had certain practices where we practiced
against the Bulgarian U19 team.
And Nikolov's dad was there, and he always – when we got to the point
where we were planning practice and talking about a wash show that we wanted,
he would say – kind of some broken English.
He'd say, oh, we always want to start with serve.
Always start with serve.
So I kind of thought about it.
I'm like, yeah, it makes some sense.
Yeah, I like that.
So no matter what type of wash show we do, we'll always start with serve.
And it was awful when Nikolov was there.
Or at least in the rare case where we're not starting with a serve,
we'll at least end it with a serve.
And the third ball will be a serve or something like that.
Yeah.
So in that practice plan, too, I have jackpot.
It just basically means an auto win.
So if the defensive side wins all three points,
or the serving side, in this case, the near side,
if they were to win all three points of that three-ball loss,
then they would win the game automatically.
Yeah.
I mean, the scoring is – I have the scoring on that practice plan as well.
It's just another reason why we have that rule.
So receiving team, if they win three out of three,
they get three big points.
If they get two – they win two out of the three,
then they get one big point.
And then they start 15-15.
Yeah.
And we found that medium pass especially is probably what needs the most
to work offensively, just in terms of, you know, it's simple concepts,
simple systems.
Or if you're going fast to the near side or the short side, as we call it,
you know, being a little bit more patient on the far side of the long way set.
We found it's – at least in the States,
the guys have a really hard time staying patient,
adjusting their approach from the inside of the court if the pass –
or the set is coming from across the court.
It's just – I think a lot of it stems from the fact that at younger ages here,
at least in the U.S., guys aren't taught to read the game early.
So, for example, they're not being taught, hey, read where that pass is
so that you can immediately –
adjust your approach accordingly and adapt what you're doing.
It just – we found that that needs a lot of feedback,
reinforcement from coaching because it's just for whatever reason.
So, if you go back to that one, he adjusted his approach and it's inside,
but he read where the pass was fairly late.
So, he kind of like stutter stepped.
It definitely impacted his first step and he went kind of fast about.
So, there's just a lot.
And the medium pass is something that we work on a lot offensively.
And it's a little bit – obviously, there's a lot of tempo.
There's a lot of communication to the setters in terms of what we want.
But there's a lot more feedback to the players in terms of how we want them
to adjust their footwork and how we want them to read the game
and when we need them to read the game.
You know, I was also like in my mind also going like,
yeah, which are those examples in the States?
And another one is Russell.
You know, like technically wise, he's an exceptional player.
Maybe physically, he's not like one of the best out there.
But just like, again, this kind of flow, this fluidity,
anticipating on what's going to happen.
Yeah.
When he was – his dad was his coach for years.
He played – he started playing volleyball much earlier than most.
And he had a couple of older brothers as well that kind of showed in the way.
So, he was kind of in a unique situation compared to most guys
that start playing volleyball in the US in terms of having older brothers
to kind of show them the example, playing much earlier.
Yeah.
And a father that can give you feedback, good quality feedback at an early age,
it's just not something you get here very often.
It's happening more often now because we're getting better coaching,
we're getting more kids playing, it's a growing sport.
But compared to what we're seeing from guys like Stanisar or guys like Schurzen,
you know, there's a lot more of those guys that are getting good quality feedback
and good quality reps at a much younger age.
