Generally, we do in the mornings when we do double practice.
So, we divide the groups because basically I have only one court.
So, the space that I have is limited.
So, I cannot be full-time in the gym because the best organization is to work with three groups.
Okay, that is what I would like to do.
But as I cannot, I generally put the middles together with the setters and with the opposite,
that I have only one in the roster.
And in the other group, I keep the receivers.
So, when I take the group, generally this group, for example, generally they are coming from the fitness.
So, they do fitness first and after they come.
So, I like to make them move a little bit in the beginning with simple drills without too many rules or things,
external things that can enter in the drill.
Because I like that they just touch the ball, run a little bit, control the quality.
And this, for example, I'm doing to work on the technique, on the defense without stopping.
So, they have to touch the ball, keep trying to run.
So, they have to draw one circle and I give like a tip, something like that.
At the end in the game, I'm telling to the player that I don't like to go directly for the tip.
I like that they wait, they read, and after they take the tip, running to take the tip.
So, this is somehow to make them repeat.
Just with that idea to stop and run to take the tip.
And when they contact the ball, don't stop the motion.
To keep running and to draw one circle.
But we spend like this maybe six minutes, seven minutes.
After I go a little bit more long, I put them in six.
And we start to attack.
And I roll shot from going six-five to make them the same contact.
in the left side and trying to contact in the left side and run keep running like drawing one circle
so i do that short ball after long ball six five after we go the same now for example they are
more in six and we do like roll shot with the idea that they touch the ball on the left side and they
keep running with the ball running with the ball i don't like to see them stopping because many
times when we defend roll shot they will not stop they will touch the ball and they will keep
the motion so this is a speed there's one warm-up to make them move and touch the ball so it's
nothing difficult and just like we'll make them move to yeah so this was we do the same for the
other side yeah because at the end we have the setters also and the opposites and for me i like
also to keep this the player to make them touch the ball in everywhere
so it doesn't matter in middles will never been one so i i try to make them touch the ball there
because i think that there will be metal a bit better and this is the same idea from there from
six so they i want to make them to show to to show them touching the ball on the right side and keep
moving keep moving because it's like defending one kind of roll shot from four that will never happen
because the mean the settings in that situation of the opposite will never
there will be just one roll guide to be a setter within the position of the wrong setter
never be in six also but that's the same it's something that i do to make them warm up and to
move and touch the ball and i don't know improve the skills of the touches and motion and moving
and control the ball so yeah so here i think it's a reading drill that i do often because as i have
the centers and i have needles in this in this moment somehow i want that the center set as much
as they can so i i put the men over the tables to have a good target for the centers and the men are
giving to them feedback about the ball if the ball is tight the ball is long if the ball is short is
the ball is off so they are giving feedback to them and after i make the needles and read the
ball so i give the ball to the center sometime i make the center move sometime i go in one so the
ball is coming from behind
and in that drill according also on the opponent if the opponent is one thing that i don't know do
a short way with the center so they play the long way so i start to to tell them what we will need
to do if we will need to adapt for example because of the short way now i think we will not do the
reading because i'm watching the middles doing the warm-up but generally i do a lot in the mornings
that i put the needles in the other side and they need to read so i'm asking them i tell to the middle
with the two step with the with the feet okay i'm checking them if they are neutral means that when
they start to move they move the the leg of the motion okay and but they touch the floor in the
same place than where they were that is neutral positive is when they open with the first step
that is positive and negative is there are some players that when they start to move they go
little more inside than where they were before okay so i try
to make them to check how they move with the first step to try to be or neutral or positive
we try to be positive every time but at least in some moment that the center fake or they are
reading or they are or they do a control movement at least to don't be negative so that is one drill
that i'm doing a lot now i'm giving just to the center balls in a row that i like to work with
three balls so like this the ball go to the center quicker and they have to react because many times
matches they don't have time to to arrive to the ball so they have to try to keep the the precision
even if the ball is if they are not comfortable with the ball so are the same it's just to give
the center warm to make them touch the ball to have the feedback with the coaches to tell them
if the ball is good or not and give them a lot of repetition in a short time we put target to them
we try to find because there is no block so at least to create on them the feeling that they have
to try to avoid or to find angles to try to touch that targets and we go with sequence so me at that
i like that we start with sequence of two attacks and slowly slowly we arrive to sequence of of five
attacks in a row because for me it's pretty similar or at least the feedback that the center
gave to me that i asked them if they like they many of them they say yes because it's pretty
similar than what happened in the match because
it's pretty similar to what happened in the match because it's pretty similar to what happened in the match
that i control a little bit the rhythm of the exercise and me with the toast i can give them
little more time or little less time so i see if i see the approach of the middle is not good enough
i get a little higher or a little lower but i want that they speed up and that they talk so i
create one sequence that i like to also to organize the motion because i like this
the middles coming in diagonal approaches so i organize i don't know i call them
because in italy they call seven me i call three three one a one leg two so they do that sequence
with the centers and they have to try to find every time the the targets of the of the course
with this this player now mistake i asked i tell to her okay just try to go before maybe the ball
was in your on your left shoulder you try to reach your guy i don't know if you want to go one you
straight so i give some feedback to man some indication about maybe about the approach or
something like that to make the approach in diagonal to the to the net i mean even me attacking
so i give them feedback and after we go with this sequence okay three now one okay so but i like to
to see how they organize the approaches and how they work with the shoulders
and it's something to give repetition
to the middles and the opposite with the with the setters that for example with the opposite
is something that i don't care too much just in this group me in general i have only one opposite
so i do this if i'm sure that i don't know maybe in the evenings he will attack little less or
something you know at the end is overused and but with the middle yes because with the middles after
they can attack in counter attack but
the teams also in past everybody's struggling so many times the middles are
playing to block so i like to give them also repetition in attack to find the timing with
the setup so there is a blocking and i think there is a transition spike yeah yeah the first
the first idea was to do kind of side out situation that i give a perfect ball to the
center of free ball situation and now it's more after one motion one block motion that we put one
block like target and and is how to try to find the way to to work with the approaches in
counter attack situation so it's the same it's not a real situation because after some other days i i
put one man attacking and some on another man behind setting one ball giving one ball immediately
to one libero so at the end in block you have to jump maximal because one attack will come so that
i like more more i i try to
to work in a real situation, more I like.
Because in some mornings, here, for example,
with the opposite, we were working that
when we are in transition situation,
many times he has to go for the tip.
And that approach we are working to try to do quicker and longer.
So we were working with that.
And the idea is that there is one center that the same,
that center is not setting,
that I would like that that center also set one attacker.
But the center is just showing where the ball will go.
Now, for example, the middle, I don't know what's in it.
So they wait for the ball of the center,
go with the ball of the reference at the end.
It's not a maximal jump in a block.
I like to, I want to work with the steps after the block.
So how they create a space with the center,
when the center is in front or where the opposite is in front,
to try to find the best way to use the middle
in counter-attacks situation.
So if after, for sure, I don't know,
after in the evening, I have to do something in a real situation.
If not, many times I say that this kind of exercise makes sense.
If after we put the same target,
we use the middle in counter-attack in a real situation.
If not, we will not improve the attack of the middle blocker in counter-attack.
We will improve the attack of middle blocker in counter-attack
in a counter-attack, in a real counter-attack situation.
Okay.
Just in the morning, in this morning,
okay, I want to make the middle attack.
I want to make the opposite attack.
I want to work with the connection with the center
in side-out situation, free-ball situation,
and in kind of counter-attack situation.
So I reduce the difficulties
to try to repeat as much as we can
in a stable situation of side-out or left-foot.
That's a perfect answer.
That's a perfect explanation of this three-in-a-row spiking.
Yeah, we come back with the sequence.
But now maybe I put more repetition.
And as I told you, I arrive sometime when I want.
For example, now, okay, I'm organizing the micro-cycles
in a different way now.
In the last three weeks,
because I have some problem with some injuries.
So I want to reduce the amount of touches in attack, okay,
because I have some shoulders that are,
that are coming with some problem.
So Mondays, instead to do doubles,
I'm doing only one practice in the evening,
and we are doing fitness.
So that fitness, I'm starting like now,
instead to do fitness and ball with the middles,
they are starting with the ball.
And that ball, the middles and the center,
and the opposite,
they are doing this kind of drills more often.
They are attacking, unblocking, attacking, playing, everything.
Because I want to keep them, keep attacking with them,
because the problem with the shoulder,
they are coming with the receiver.
So the receiver, I'm doing fitness and after ball
that I used to do defense, pass,
and with the middles and the opposite,
I'm doing this kind of drill more often.
Then when I work in the mornings,
I make them block to the middle,
but not attack, for example, okay?
And this is the same sequence of attacks that me,
I like to make the middle attack from everywhere.
Attack long to the, far from the center in front,
front from the center behind, close to the center,
in front, close to the center, in behind,
and make them attack everywhere with the sequence,
three attack, four attack.
So I tell them, okay, you go three, one, three, one leg, two.
They go three, one, three, one, one leg, two.
Going to the, the next groups are coming.
So like after one hour and...
Yeah, more or less we do 40, 50 minutes of work.
And now with this group,
we have four defense, okay?
That I think are four defense in a row for each player
with first tempo and ball in four.
So middle blocker, me the same.
Here, I want to make them touch the ball.
Maybe they are coming from the fitness
or somehow I want to, they are warm, okay?
It's not like the first group that they are coming from,
do nothing or something like that.
So I want to make them touch the ball.
After, this is just four boards for me.
So me, in some way, I want to make them touch the ball. After, this is just four boards for me.
So me, in some way, I want to make them touch the ball. After, this is just four boards for me.
So me, in some way, I want to make them touch the ball. After, this is just four boards for me.
So me, in some way, I want to make them touch the ball. After, this is just four boards for me.
So me, in some way, I want to make them touch the ball. After, this is just four boards for me.
So me, in some way, I want to make them touch the ball. After, this is just four boards for me.
So me, in some way, I want to make them touch the ball. After, this is just four boards for me.
So me, in some way, I want to make them touch the ball. After, this is just four boards for me.
other moment I work with the quality that I tell them okay four ball that we can set
so maybe we will attack 10 times 12 times five times so according on the quality of their touches
the volume will be higher or will be lower so me this is also something that I like to talk with
the player that when the quality is not coming we work with volume we increase the volume because
like this if I want to do 20 good action of volleyball at the end to be sure that we are
doing that 20 action of volleyball I need to work two hours because the quality is not coming but I
prefer to work little less I don't know tomorrow is our last practice before to go to the final of
the cup tomorrow I want to work with quality I don't want to work with volume but if the quality
is not coming okay we have to go with volume to be sure that the quality at the end we do that
amount of touch
is that we want to do with a good quality okay so here I alternate sometimes I do first tempo
four sometimes first tempo two sometimes I put we are three on the net and I decide sometimes
it's a sequence so I do okay ball middle four middle two or so me I like to to give also the
same that they don't expect where the ball will go now it's clear because it was one ball for the
middle one ball in four one ball for the middle one body four because in the beginning I don't
like that
they think too much they just they know the sequence they have to be there focus on the
touches okay after it's true that volleyball is not like that they don't know where the ball will
go so I create some question marks that maybe I I choose where to where to who will attack
okay in terms of the coaches and and we go with a sequence that they don't know how will be okay
and we work all with volume or with quality
and go to the this is the last phase of defense first tempo two first tempo two okay
that is the same now our four touches in one moment we start to pursue I told them okay four
balls that we can that you can that we can set and attack okay that are high in our court high
enough in our court high enough in our court and so this is
finishing and then there is some passing from serfs from platform yes after pass okay that
sometime is the same according on me the main issue the main problem is that I have only one net
so if I put tables according where I put the tables I have a space for the receiver so if I put
like now that we want to serve from one we can put the receiver only in five and in six we cannot put
real I cannot wait now that three balls going into the Net and that three balls going into their rate
work one-to-one in pass because at the end are the tables so i i'm working with the with the
liberals in individual okay with one coach and me i'm working with the connection of the of the
receiver because often i like to do serve and pass a lot even in the evenings but in the evenings
many times the liberals are involved that drill so in the evenings i work more with the connection
between the receiver and the liberals so today i was speaking with my liberal that now in the
modern volleyball that many teams are doing the center one to make the opposite attack from two
and the position four attack from four the liberals are in one so in on six rotation four
times the liberals are in one so happen more often that the receiver are together the couple of us
that i think is
one of the reason that the the level of the past drop a little bit to everybody
because now everybody is serving more on the receiver and the liberals can help less
at the end when they are in one it's difficult for them to help the the that uh trajectory five
five to five five to six so that connection livers and receiver i work more in the evenings
because i like to work with two only two receivers i never work with three together because i want to
increase the amount of touches okay so if i put three there will be a receiver that they will not
touch the ball many times so i like to increase the amount of touches so i work every time with
two receivers and in the mornings often i use the morning to work with the connection between the
two receivers and the liberals they work individual but now there will be more in six from
serving from one and maybe we face one one team i think
that they were with some spin rotation from one or something like that so the coach of one
with levy liberos is trying to reply that kind of stuff and me also i'm serving also because i think
in that moment we were facing one thing that they were with one player that they come also with
every set from one that they you don't know it will become flotation rotated or or spin rotation
so we try to reply as much as we can the the set that we will face within the match
and after this the same sometimes i work with volume or we go by time some other time i work
with quality so i put some targets that we need to arrive to 20 or that we need to do five times
in a row three on five for example that i like a lot because you need to do 60 percent of the time
60 percent of five
and the 20 i like also that is i start they start from zero if the pass is positive they take plus
two positives two positive in a row is one point one perfect is one point one negative is one
minus two minus in a row is minus one and after exclamative is wash is nothing and if is a slash
or ace they go
go if they are under five they go to zero if they are over five but under ten they go to five
if they are over ten but under or and if they are under ten they go to five if they are over
they go to ten so if you are eleven you go to ten after ten you go to five after five you go to zero
so it's easy to control because you go one one plus two two minus one one plus two three three plus
I don't know, three, four, five, five plus, six, one mistake, five, one mistake, zero.
And they have to arrive to 20 or to 25 or to 15.
So, according on the target or the time that we have or how much time I want to work with them.
So, this, that I like to do a lot, to put them some targets.
And until they don't reach the target, we stay there.
And now, for example, is the same with the connection between the deliverer and the receiver in one side and the receiver alone in six in the other side.
Go to the last part of this practice.
It is.
Yeah.
Yeah.
And after, in some moment, we make the deliverers set, basically, after we keep one position for a year.
But this drill is more.
For the liberals than for the position for that.
Sometime I ask them if they want to set some balls, because at the end for the liberal.
So we, we put the coaching one at the end is when the setter will defense and we try to, to touch the ball with some spin to make the ball arrive with the spin to the, to the liberal and to make them set in two and four.
And so that, because at the end they have to settle.
So.
Good stuff.
